and the upper altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar hearth and upward there shall be four horns.
good understanding giveth favor; but the way of the transgressor is hard.
in this year of jubilee ye shall return every man unto his possession.
and with them heman and jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were mentioned by name, to give thanks to jehovah, because his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever;
now the word of jehovah came unto jonah the son of amittai, saying,
ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt-offering, nor meal-offering; and ye shall pour no drink-offering thereon.
and jehovah your god, he will thrust them out from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as jehovah your god spake unto you.
pilate said unto them, ye have a guard: go, make it `as' sure as ye can.
and they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole.
i am like a pelican of the wilderness; i am become as an owl of the waste places.
and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.
and the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.
`and' the tribe of zebulun: and the prince of the children of zebulun shall be eliab the son of helon.
egypt shall be a desolation, and edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence done to the children of judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
these things i remember, and pour out my soul within me, how i went with the throng, and led them to the house of god, with the voice of joy and praise, a multitude keeping holyday.
for they were about five thousand men. and he said unto his disciples, make them sit down in companies, about fifty each.
a wife that committeth adultery! that taketh strangers instead of her husband!
therefore thus saith jehovah of hosts, behold, i will melt them, and try them; for how `else' should i do, because of the daughter of my people?
now while he was not yet gone back, go back then, `said he', to gedaliah the son of ahikam, the son of shaphan, whom the king of babylon hath made governor over the cities of judah, and dwell with him among the people; or go wheresoever it seemeth right unto thee to go. so the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a present, and let him go.
they are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that i set before you and before your fathers.
and they shall be as mighty men, treading down `their enemies' in the mire of the streets in the battle; and they shall fight, because jehovah is with them; and the riders on horses shall be confounded.
and it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and i have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
and after six days jesus taketh with him peter, and james, and john, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them;
in everything give thanks: for this is the will of god in christ jesus to you-ward.
and moses was very wroth, and said unto jehovah, respect not thou their offering: i have not taken one ass from them, neither have i hurt one of them.
i will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my maker.
then they sent to jezebel, saying, naboth is stoned, and is dead.
bind them continually upon thy heart; tie them about thy neck.
and he was preaching in the synagogues of galilee.
so brutish was i, and ignorant; i was `as' a beast before thee.
thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of jacob and joseph. selah
and when they were come out of the boat, straightway `the people' knew him,
and not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute; but also that the temple of the great goddess diana be made of no account, and that she should even be deposed from her magnificence whom all asia and the world worshippeth.
now when certain days were passed, agrippa the king and bernice arrived at caesarea, and saluted festus.
the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are justice: a god of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is he.
but herod, when he heard `thereof', said, john, whom i beheaded, he is risen.
cursed be he that smiteth his neighbor in secret. and all the people shall say, amen.
glory ye in his holy name; let the heart of them rejoice that seek jehovah.
thus saith jehovah, who giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, who stirreth up the sea, so that the waves thereof roar; jehovah of hosts is his name:
but the eleven disciples went into galilee, unto the mountain where jesus had appointed them.
and it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.
behold, god is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in strength of understanding.
who is this that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have i uttered that which i understood not, things too wonderful for me, which i knew not.
now we pray to god that ye do no evil; not that we may appear approved, but that ye may do that which is honorable, though we be as reprobate.
and on the `one' side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the gate toward the north, were two tables; and on the other side, which belonged to the porch of the gate, were two tables.
and his master said unto him, we will not turn aside into the city of a foreigner, that is not of the children of israel; but we will pass over to gibeah.
thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices; but thou hast burdened me with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.
thus saith jehovah, write ye this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days; for no more shall a man of his seed prosper, sitting upon the throne of david, and ruling in judah.
when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which jehovah our god hath commanded you?
then said he unto me, these waters issue forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into the arabah; and they shall go toward the sea; into the sea `shall the waters go' which were made to issue forth; and the waters shall be healed.
he that saith he abideth in him ought himself also to walk even as he walked.
and ye shall measure without the city for the east side two thousand cubits, and for the south side two thousand cubits, and for the west side two thousand cubits, and for the north side two thousand cubits, the city being in the midst. this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.
and in the candlestick were four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knops thereof, and the flowers thereof;
wherefore ye witness to yourselves, that ye are sons of them that slew the prophets.
and that which is left thereof shall aaron and his sons eat: it shall be eaten without leaven in a holy place; in the court of the tent of meeting they shall eat it.
and this again ye do: ye cover the altar of jehovah with tears, with weeping, and with sighing, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, neither receiveth it with good will at your hand.
or darkness, so that thou canst not see, and abundance of waters cover thee.
wherefore leaving the doctrine of the first principles of christ, let us press on unto perfection; not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward god,
wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of jehovah, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst that which was evil in the sight of jehovah?
in the four corners of the court there were courts inclosed, forty `cubits' long and thirty broad: these four in the corners were of one measure.
i will give thanks unto thee, o lord, among the peoples: i will sing praises unto thee among the nations.
in thee have they set light by father and mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the sojourner; in thee have they wronged the fatherless and the widow.
and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and aaron, loose the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.
thus will i cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.
so joshua sent the people away, every man unto his inheritance.
so they took away the stone. and jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, father, i thank thee that thou heardest me.
arise and thresh, o daughter of zion; for i will make thy horn iron, and i will make thy hoofs brass; and thou shalt beat in pieces many peoples: and i will devote their gain unto jehovah, and their substance unto the lord of the whole earth.
but these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood; in their full measure shall they come upon thee, in the multitude of thy sorceries, and the great abundance of thine enchantments.
and to seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name enosh. then began men to call upon the name of jehovah.
and the day following he appeared unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?
also the word of jehovah came unto me, saying,
then manoah entreated jehovah, and said, oh, lord, i pray thee, let the man of god whom thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born.
and pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and he did not let the people go.
and if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:
and demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying, thou art the son of god. and rebuking them, he suffered them not to speak, because they knew that he was the christ.
sing unto him, sing praises unto him; talk ye of all his marvelous works.
therefore thus saith jehovah concerning jehoiakim the son of josiah, king of judah: they shall not lament for him, `saying', ah my brother! or, ah sister! they shall not lament for him, `saying' ah lord! or, ah his glory!
and our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, take provision in your hand for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them, we are your servants: and now make ye a covenant with us.
and gedor, and ahio, and zechariah, and mikloth.
so then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of god that hath mercy.
therefore say thou unto them, thus saith jehovah of hosts: return unto me, saith jehovah of hosts, and i will return unto you, saith jehovah of hosts.
for if ye shall diligently keep all this commandment which i command you, to do it, to love jehovah your god, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him;
therefore he brought down their heart with labor; they fell down, and there was none to help.
and after abimelech there arose to save israel tola the son of puah, the son of dodo, a man of issachar; and he dwelt in shamir in the hill-country of ephraim.
for, lo, the wicked bend the bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may shoot in darkness at the upright in heart;
and they passed thence unto the hill-country of ephraim, and came unto the house of micah.
i will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; i will show them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity.
thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
now the rest of the acts of jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of israel and judah.
shammoth the harorite, helez the pelonite,
and there was again war with the philistines at gob; and elhanan the son of jaareoregim the beth-lehemite slew goliath the gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
but if any man seemeth to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of god.
guide me in thy truth, and teach me; for thou art the god of my salvation; for thee do i wait all the day.
and the man micah had a house of gods, and he made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.
and ye shall eat old store long kept, and ye shall bring forth the old because of the new.
this also shall be my salvation, that a godless man shall not come before him.
and because ye are sons, god sent forth the spirit of his son into our hearts, crying, abba, father.
the best of them is as a brier; the most upright is `worse' than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen, even thy visitation, is come; now shall be their perplexity.
for this is the will of god, `even' your sanctification, that ye abstain from fornication;
howbeit jehovah would not destroy judah, for david his servant's sake, as he promised him to give unto him a lamp for his children alway.
but this spake he of the spirit, which they that believed on him were to receive: for the spirit was not yet `given'; because jesus was not yet glorified.
so now it was not you that sent me hither, but god: and he hath made me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and ruler over all the land of egypt.
and all israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them; for they said, lest the earth swallow us up.
make level the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.
and ye have done evil more than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the stubbornness of his evil heart, so that ye hearken not unto me:
therefore the anger of jehovah was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curse that is written in this book;
therefore thus saith the lord jehovah: because ye are turbulent more than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept mine ordinances, neither have done after the ordinances of the nations that are round about you;
and maacah the wife of machir bare a son, and she called his name peresh; and the name of his brother was sheresh; and his sons were ulam and rakem.
now in the morning as he returned to the city, he hungered.
and men shall go into the caves of the rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from before the terror of jehovah, and from the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake mightily the earth.
and if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.
and the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name ben-ammi: the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this day.
and what can david say more unto thee? for thou knowest thy servant, o lord jehovah.
the wicked have waited for me, to destroy me; `but' i will consider thy testimonies.
and afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called zerah.
yet heard i the voice of his words; and when i heard the voice of his words, then was i fallen into a deep sleep on my face, with my face toward the ground.
but he thought scorn to lay hands on mordecai alone; for they had made known to him the people of mordecai: wherefore haman sought to destroy all the jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of ahasuerus, even the people of mordecai.
and when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
and they wrought the onyx stones, inclosed in settings of gold, graven with the engravings of a signet, according to the names of the children of israel.
after this jesus, knowing that all things are now finished, that the scripture might be accomplished, saith, i thirst.
and i will cut off the cities of thy land, and will throw down all thy strongholds.
thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in jerusalem eight years: and he departed without being desired; and they buried him in the city of david, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.
in those days jehovah began to cut off from israel: and hazael smote them in all the borders of israel;
and the king of israel said unto his servants, know ye that ramoth-gilead is ours, and we are still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of syria?
and when the princes of judah heard these things, they came up from the king's house unto the house of jehovah; and they sat in the entry of the new gate of jehovah's `house'.
for they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works.
and there came to him his mother and brethren, and they could not come at him for the crowd.
and the men of ephraim were gathered together, and passed northward; and they said unto jephthah, wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thy house upon thee with fire.
and when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing grain of the philistines, and burnt up both the shocks and the standing grain, and also the oliveyards.
and the disciples were filled with joy with the holy spirit.
therefore will i cause you to go into captivity beyond damascus, saith jehovah, whose name is the god of hosts.
the words of jonadab the son of rechab, that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed; and unto this day they drink none, for they obey their father's commandment: but i have spoken unto you, rising up early and speaking; and ye have not hearkened unto me.
haste thee, escape thither; for i cannot do anything till thou be come thither. therefore the name of the city was called zoar.
even them will i bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt-offering before jehovah: it is a sin-offering.
and the king of egypt spake to the hebrew midwives, of whom the name of the one was shiphrah, and the name of the other puah:
the children of jericho, three hundred forty and five.
destruction and misery are in their ways;
now if thou shalt kill this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
the children of zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.
and saying, the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of god is at hand: repent ye, and believe in the gospel.
that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savor unto the god of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.
then washed i thee with water; yea, i thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and i anointed thee with oil.
now there were dwelling at jerusalem jews, devout men, from every nation under heaven.
and as samuel was offering up the burnt-offering, the philistines drew near to battle against israel; but jehovah thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten down before israel.
let them be for thyself alone, and not for strangers with thee.
and hadad found great favor in the sight of pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of tahpenes the queen.
i will give great thanks unto jehovah with my mouth; yea, i will praise him among the multitude.
and they went away and told it unto the rest: neither believed they them.
and straightway the damsel rose up, and walked; for she was twelve years old. and they were amazed straightway with a great amazement.
moreover uzziah had an army of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their reckoning made by jeiel the scribe and maaseiah the officer, under the hand of hananiah, one of the king's captains.
and he said unto them, take heed, and keep yourselves from all covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.
and naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it.
and absalom spake unto amnon neither good nor bad; for absalom hated amnon, because he had forced his sister tamar.
but far be it from me to glory, save in the cross of our lord jesus christ, through which the world hath been crucified unto me, and i unto the world.
of the tribe of benjamin, palti the son of raphu.
but if the princes hear that i have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, declare unto us now what thou hast said unto the king; hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the king said unto thee:
and it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that i will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand until i have passed by:
and i saw another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like unto lamb, and he spake as a dragon.
thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken.
and again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. and the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, o man of god, i pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.
and her husband went with her, weeping as he went, and followed her to bahurim. then said abner unto him, go, return: and he returned.
let us choose for us that which is right: let us know among ourselves what is good.
for the waters of nimrim shall be desolate; for the grass is withered away, the tender grass faileth, there is no green thing.
and they said, what one is there of the tribes of israel that came not up unto jehovah to mizpah? and, behold, there came none to the camp from jabesh-gilead to the assembly.
but i will tarry at ephesus until pentecost;
a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;
the beginning of strife is `as' when one letteth out water: therefore leave off contention, before there is quarrelling.
as for the earth, out of it cometh bread; and underneath it is turned up as it were by fire.
one of his disciples, andrew, simon peter's brother, saith unto him,
behold, the hire of the laborers who mowed your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth out: and the cries of them that reaped have entered into the ears of the lord of sabaoth.
and the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top to the bottom.
he that chastiseth the nations, shall not he correct, `even' he that teacheth man knowledge?
and ye shall rise up from the ambush, and take possession of the city: for jehovah your god will deliver it into your hand.
and this is the thing that ye shall do: ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.
and when ye eat, and when ye drink, do not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?
so zadok the priest, and nathan the prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and the cherethites and the pelethites, went down, and caused solomon to ride upon king david's mule, and brought him to gihon.
my knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness.
having confidence in thine obedience i write unto thee, knowing that thou wilt do even beyond what i say.
no eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, for that thy person was abhorred, in the day that thou wast born.
but when he was strong, his heart was lifted up, so that he did corruptly, and he trespassed against jehovah his god; for he went into the temple of jehovah to burn incense upon the altar of incense.
and saul said unto his uncle, he told us plainly that the asses were found. but concerning the matter of the kingdom, whereof samuel spake, he told him not.
and that which fell among the thorns, these are they that have heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of `this' life, and bring no fruit to perfection.
and call upon me in the day of trouble; i will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.
and when he came to the hill, he took them from their hand, and bestowed them in the house; and he let the men go, and they departed.
and why call ye me, lord, lord, and do not the things which i say?
and the city hath no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine upon it: for the glory of god did lighten it, and the lamp thereof `is' the lamb.
they give drink to every beast of the field; the wild asses quench their thirst.
after him baruch the son of zabbai earnestly repaired another portion, from the turning `of the wall' unto the door of the house of eliashib the high priest.
o praise jehovah, all ye nations; laud him, all ye peoples.
and it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and some of the host and of the stars it cast down to the ground, and trampled upon them.
then jesse made shammah to pass by. and he said, neither hath jehovah chosen this.
for he was yet in the loins of his father, when melchizedek met him.
unto which `promise' our twelve tribes, earnestly serving `god' night and day, hope to attain. and concerning this hope i am accused by the jews, o king!
give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her works praise her in the gates.
the fifth to malchijah, the sixth to mijamin,
and obed begat jesse, and jesse begat david.
god is unto us a god of deliverances; and unto jehovah the lord belongeth escape from death.
but he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them,
and he laid his hands upon her: and immediately she was made straight, and glorified god.
a servant that dealeth wisely shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part in the inheritance among the brethren.
and the taskmasters were urgent saying, fulfil your works, `your' daily tasks, as when there was straw.
and the children of israel cried unto jehovah: for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of israel.
for as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without the law: and as many as have sinned under the law shall be judged by the law;
and there was one called barabbas, `lying' bound with them that had made insurrection, men who in the insurrection had committed murder.
neither shalt thou set thee up a pillar; which jehovah thy god hateth.
while it is said, to-day if ye shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.
and joshua did unto them as jehovah bade him: he hocked their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.
then spake the chaldeans to the king in the syrian language, o king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.
the chariots of god are twenty thousand, even thousands upon thousands; the lord is among them, `as in' sinai, in the sanctuary.
and jehovah spake unto moses and aaron in mount hor, by the border of the land of edom, saying,
be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased.
then will i distress ariel, and there shall be mourning and lamentation; and she shall be unto me as ariel.
the cloak that i left at troas with carpus, bring when thou comest, and the books, especially the parchments.
for there is born to you this day in the city of david a saviour, who is christ the lord.
for the word of god is living, and active, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and quick to discern the thoughts and intents of the heart.
and they sing as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders: and no man could learn the song save the hundred and forty and four thousand, `even' they that had been purchased out of the earth.
and thou shalt speak unto him, and put the words in his mouth: and i will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.
shall i bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith jehovah: shall i that cause to bring forth shut `the womb'? saith thy god.
and he said unto them, the kings of the gentiles have lordship over them; and they that have authority over them are called benefactors.
seek ye jehovah and his strength; seek his face evermore.
it is time for jehovah to work; `for' they have made void thy law.
and the cubit on the one side, and the cubit on the other side, of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
these four were born to the giant in gath; and they fell by the hand of david, and by the hand of his servants.
and he spake to his disciples, that a little boat should wait on him because of the crowd, lest they should throng him:
for mine eyes are upon all their ways; they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity concealed from mine eyes.
and thou shalt bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for removing; and thou shalt go forth thyself at even in their sight, as when men go forth into exile.
and take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set thy face toward it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. this shall be a sign to the house of israel.
but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted god in the desert.
once have i spoken, and i will not answer; yea, twice, but i will proceed no further.
then i desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was diverse from all of them, exceeding terrible, whose teeth were of iron, and its nails of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet;
pharaoh king of egypt had gone up, and taken gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the canaanites that dwelt in the city, and given it for a portion unto his daughter, solomon's wife.
then was king belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were perplexed.
and he will give the rain for thy seed, wherewith thou shalt sow the ground; and bread of the increase of the ground, and it shall be fat and plenteous. in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures;
for this cause the jews seized me in the temple, and assayed to kill me.
and when jehovah saw that they humbled themselves, the word of jehovah came to shemaiah, saying, they have humbled themselves: i will not destroy them; but i will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon jerusalem by the hand of shishak.
but i made supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not; and do thou, when once thou hast turned again, establish thy brethren.
all this have i seen in my days of vanity: there is a righteous man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth `his life' in his evil-doing.
then zipporah took a flint, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet; and she said, surely a bridegroom of blood art thou to me.
the seventh to hakkoz, the eighth to abijah,
i have also seen wisdom under the sun on this wise, and it seemed great unto me:
and moses came and called for the elders of the people, and set before them all these words which jehovah commanded him.
and the four wheels were underneath the panels; and the axletrees of the wheels were in the base: and the height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.
for the sake of the house of jehovah our god i will seek thy good. psalm 123 a song of ascents.
seeing his days are determined, the number of his months is with thee, and thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass;
ye no longer suffer him to do aught for his father or his mother;
and as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of israel gave in abundance the first-fruits of grain, new wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.
and these words appeared in their sight as idle talk; and they disbelieved them.
death and life are in the power of the tongue; and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.
now peter was sitting without in the court: and a maid came unto him, saying, thou also wast with jesus the galilaean.
let not them that wait for thee be put to shame through me, o lord jehovah of hosts: let not those that seek thee be brought to dishonor through me, o god of israel.
but thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.
and a voice came forth from the throne, saying, give praise to our god, all ye his servants, ye that fear him, the small and the great.
once have i sworn by my holiness: i will not lie unto david:
or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again?
ask me never so much dowry and gift, and i will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.
and it shall come to pass, when pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, what is your occupation?
for he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.
and the vision of the evenings and mornings which hath been told is true: but shut thou up the vision; for it belongeth to many days `to come'.
a wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at his left.
and they put him in ward, because it had not been declared what should be done to him.
and the lot eastward fell to shelemiah. then for zechariah his son, a discreet counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward.
and it shall be, when jehovah thy god shall bring thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give thee, great and goodly cities, which thou buildest not,
praise ye jehovah. oh give thanks unto jehovah; for he is good; for his lovingkindness `endureth' forever.
the nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is thine own nakedness.
and moses went out from pharaoh, and entreated jehovah.
and the god of israel stirred up the spirit of pul king of assyria, and the spirit of tilgath-pilneser king of assyria, and he carried them away, even the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half-tribe of manasseh, and brought them unto halah, and habor, and hara, and to the river of gozan, unto this day.
and on the morrow they entered into caesarea. and cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his kinsmen and his near friends.
take the girdle that thou hast bought, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to the euphrates, and hide it there in a cleft of the rock.
thy body is `like' a round goblet, `wherein' no mingled wine is wanting: thy waist is `like' a heap of wheat set about with lilies.
they joined themselves also unto baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
yet thou saidst, i am innocent; surely his anger is turned away from me. behold, i will enter into judgment with thee, because thou sayest, i have not sinned.
and he did that which was right in the eyes of jehovah; he did according to all that his father uzziah had done.
and the king took off his ring, which he had taken from haman, and gave it unto mordecai. and esther set mordecai over the house of haman.
bread of falsehood is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
for every kind of beasts and birds, of creeping things and things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed by mankind.
then said all the trees unto the bramble, come thou, and reign over us.
and when ye shall hear of wars and tumults, be not terrified: for these things must needs come to pass first; but the end is not immediately.
but i will settle him in my house and in my kingdom for ever; and his throne shall be established for ever.
take aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and the bullock of the sin-offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread;
now when these things were done, the princes drew near unto me, saying, the people of israel, and the priests and the levites, have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands, `doing' according to their abominations, even of the canaanites, the hittites, the perizzites, the jebusites, the ammonites, the moabites, the egyptians, and the amorites.
and all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of ai.
and of the sons of zattu: elioenai, eliashib, mattaniah, and jeremoth, and zabad, and aziza.
they are exalted; yet a little while, and they are gone; yea, they are brought low, they are taken out of the way as all others, and are cut off as the tops of the ears of grain.
and said unto them, ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for ye purpose that which will bring upon us a trespass against jehovah, to add unto our sins and to our trespass; for our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against israel.
yet shall the righteous hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger.
and hath delivered us from our adversaries; for his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever:
for though i made you sorry with my epistle, i do not regret it: though i did regret `it' (for i see that that epistle made you sorry, though but for a season),
or in enmity smote him with his hand, so that he died; he that smote him shall surely be put to death; he is a murderer: the avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death, when he meeteth him.
therefore shalt thou give a parting gift to moresheth-gath: the houses of achzib shall be a deceitful thing unto the kings of israel.
where they crucified him, and with him two others, on either side one, and jesus in the midst.
and jehovah said unto him, surely i will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the midianites as one man.
and to another workings of miracles; and to another prophecy; and to another discernings of spirits; to another `divers' kinds of tongues; and to another the interpretation of tongues:
canst thou send forth lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, here we are?
to devise skilful works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
hold the pattern of sound words which thou hast heard from me, in faith and love which is in christ jesus.
and laban said, it is not so done in our place, to give the younger before the first-born.
when those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up beside them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
and the cup in like manner after supper, saying, this cup is the new covenant in my blood, `even' that which is poured out for you.
hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.
and he will consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and it shall be as when a standard-bearer fainteth.
and ittai answered the king, and said, as jehovah liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life, even there also will thy servant be.
and husham died, and hadad the son of bedad, who smote midian in the field of moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was avith.
therefore thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel: jonadab the son of rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.
and straightway in the morning the chief priests with the elders and scribes, and the whole council, held a consultation, and bound jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him up to pilate.
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood;
and moses gave unto them, even to the children of gad, and to the children of reuben, and unto the half-tribe of manasseh the son of joseph, the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, and the kingdom of og king of bashan, the land, according to the cities thereof with `their' borders, even the cities of the land round about.
for i also am a man under authority, having under myself soldiers: and i say to this one, go, and he goeth; and to another, come, and he cometh; and to my servant, do this, and he doeth it.
and all the men of israel assembled themselves unto king solomon at the feast, in the month ethanim, which is the seventh month.
and jehovah said unto cain, why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?
and when he opened the fourth seal, i heard the voice of the fourth living creature saying, come.
thus israel dwelt in the land of the amorites.
and moses said unto jehovah, oh, lord, i am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant; for i am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
by the multitude of thine iniquities, in the unrighteousness of thy traffic, thou hast profaned thy sanctuaries; therefore have i brought forth a fire from the midst of thee; it hath devoured thee, and i have turned thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee.
and jehovah hath avouched thee this day to be a people for his own possession, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;
thus hath jehovah of hosts spoken, saying, execute true judgment, and show kindness and compassion every man to his brother;
for if i build up again those things which i destroyed, i prove myself a transgressor.
he built elath, and restored it to judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.
and he answered, fear not; for they that are with us are more than they that are with them.
thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, in the deeps.
and when jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her, woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.
he teacheth my hands to war, so that mine arms do bend a bow of brass.
and the men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
he sealeth up the hand of every man, that all men whom he hath made may know `it'.
on the top of high places by the way, where the paths meet, she standeth;
the wife hath not power over her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power over his own body, but the wife.
delivering thee from the people, and from the gentiles, unto whom i send thee,
my bread also which i gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith i fed thee, thou didst even set it before them for a sweet savor; and `thus' it was, saith the lord jehovah.
but peter continued knocking: and when they had opened, they saw him, and were amazed.
and their words pleased hamor, and shechem hamor's son.
and all the men of judah answered the men of israel, because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore then are ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all at the king's cost? or hath he given us any gift?
for we have not a high priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but one that hath been in all points tempted like as `we are, yet' without sin.
they shall therefore keep my charge, lest they bear sin for it, and die therein, if they profane it: i am jehovah who sanctifieth them.
for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we know not what is become of him.
and jehovah said, i will destroy man whom i have created from the face of the ground; both man, and beast, and creeping things, and birds of the heavens; for it repenteth me that i have made them.
and other fell into the good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit a hundredfold. as he said these things, he cried, he that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
and we have sent together with him the brother whose praise in the gospel `is spread' through all the churches;
these are the generations of noah. noah was a righteous man, `and' perfect in his generations: noah walked with god.
now when simon saw that through the laying on of the apostles' hands the holy spirit was given, he offered them money,
if my people, who are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will i hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
then spake jesus to the multitudes and to his disciples,
behold, if a river overflow, he trembleth not; he is confident, though a jordan swell even to his mouth.
remember these things, o jacob, and israel; for thou art my servant: i have formed thee; thou art my servant: o israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me.
and again he said, whereunto shall i liken the kingdom of god?
and so it was, when israel had sown, that the midianites came up, and the amalekites, and the children of the east; they came up against them;
and the standard of the camp of the children of ephraim set forward according to their hosts: and over his host was elishama the son of ammihud.
and ishbibenob, who was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred `shekels' of brass in weight, he being girded with a new `sword', thought to have slain david.
wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life.
howbeit from the sins of jeroboam the son of nebat, wherewith he made israel to sin, jehu departed not from after them, `to wit', the golden calves that were in beth-el, and that were in dan.
rejoice in that day, and leap `for joy': for behold, your reward is great in heaven; for in the same manner did their fathers unto the prophets.
the face of jehovah is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.
but as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by god, saying,
and the people cried unto moses; and moses prayed unto jehovah, and the fire abated.
therefore the anger of jehovah was kindled against israel, and he sold them into the hand of cushan-rishathaim king of mesopotamia: and the children of israel served cushan-rishathaim eight years.
and it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows on high are opened, and the foundations of the earth tremble.
then thy handmaid said, let, i pray thee, the word of my lord the king be comfortable; for as an angel of god, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad: and jehovah thy god be with thee.
and matthew and thomas, and james `the son' of alphaeus, and simon who was called the zealot,
the king shall joy in thy strength, o jehovah; and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice!
thus did all the children of israel; as jehovah commanded moses and aaron, so did they.
and if he come to see `me', he speaketh falsehood; his heart gathereth iniquity to itself: when he goeth abroad, he telleth it.
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with your spirit. amen.
and by chance a certain priest was going down that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
and the third day they cast out with their own hands the tackling of the ship.
the men of arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about, and valorous men were in thy towers; they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have perfected thy beauty.
and the king appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate: and the people trod upon him in the gate, and he died as the man of god had said, who spake when the king came down to him.
and the priest shall wave them with the bread of the first-fruits for a wave-offering before jehovah, with the two lambs: they shall be holy to jehovah for the priest.
joahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in jerusalem.
and on that day, when even was come, he saith unto them, let us go over unto the other side.
i will worship toward thy holy temple, and give thanks unto thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.
whereunto i was appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher.
even so ye also, when ye see all these things, know ye that he is nigh, `even' at the doors.
the king's strength also loveth justice; thou dost establish equity; thou executest justice and righteousness in jacob.
and he said, he that showed mercy on him. and jesus said unto him, go, and do thou likewise.
and jehovah repented of the evil which he said he would do unto his people.
for demas forsook me, having loved this present world, and went to thessalonica; crescens to galatia, titus to dalmatia.
for he that herein serveth christ is well-pleasing to god, and approved of men.
then said the prophet jeremiah unto hananiah the prophet, hear now, hananiah: jehovah hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.
that the word might be fulfilled which he spake, of those whom thou hast given me i lost not one.
now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing.
and they slew hamor and shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took dinah out of shechem's house, and went forth.
be not therefore like unto them: for your father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.
ye did not choose me, but i chose you, and appointed you, that ye should go and bear fruit, and `that' your fruit should abide: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the father in my name, he may give it you.
so uzziah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in the field of burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, he is a leper: and jotham his son reigned in his stead.
and this is the blessing, wherewith moses the man of god blessed the children of israel before his death.
he was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in jerusalem: and his mother's name was jehoaddin of jerusalem.
for he will deliver the needy when he crieth, and the poor, that hath no helper.
and thou hast said unto me, o lord jehovah, buy thee the field for money, and call witnesses; whereas the city is given into the hand of the chaldeans.
then upon jahaziel the son of zechariah, the son of benaiah, the son of jeiel, the son of mattaniah, the levite, of the sons of asaph, came the spirit of jehovah in the midst of the assembly;
moses commanded us a law, an inheritance for the assembly of jacob.
who led thee through the great and terrible wilderness, `wherein were' fiery serpents and scorpions, and thirsty ground where was no water; who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint;
and he that was sown among the thorns, this is he that heareth the word; and the care of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.
but from thence ye shall seek jehovah thy god, and thou shalt find him, when thou searchest after him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
nd all the men of israel assembled themselves unto the king at the feast, which was `in' the seventh month.
and it came to pass, when joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stripped joseph of his coat, the coat of many colors that was on him;
and he said unto them, cast the net on the right side of the boat, and ye shall find. they cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.
jehovah said moreover unto me: son of man, wilt thou judge oholah and oholibah? then declare unto them their abominations.
then the priest shall come in and look; and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy in the house: it is unclean.
and whosoever in the open field toucheth one that is slain with a sword, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
forasmuch as i exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people israel, and thou hast walked in the way of jeroboam, and hast made my people israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins;
after these things i will return, and i will build again the tabernacle of david, which is fallen; and i will build again the ruins thereof, and i will set it up:
take away the wicked `from' before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.
and it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers and elders and scribes were gathered together in jerusalem;
and after these days elisabeth his wife conceived; and she hid herself five months, saying,
make sharp the arrows; hold firm the shields: jehovah hath stirred up the spirit of the kings of the medes; because his purpose is against babylon, to destroy it: for it is the vengeance of jehovah, the vengeance of his temple.
there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone which moses put there at horeb, when jehovah made a covenant with the children of israel, when they came out of the land of egypt.
after these things i saw, and behold, a great multitude, which no man could number, out of every nation and of `all' tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the lamb, arrayed in white robes, and palms in their hands;
there shall no mischief happen to the righteous; but the wicked shall be filled with evil.
this jesus did god raise up, whereof we all are witnesses.
i beseech thee for my child, whom i have begotten in my bonds, onesimus,
then hear thou from heaven, even from thy dwelling-place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people who have sinned against thee.
in all things showing thyself an ensample of good works; in thy doctrine `showing' uncorruptness, gravity,
and ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which i have sacrificed for you.
now if timothy come, see that he be with you without fear; for he worketh the work of the lord, as i also do:
behold, he travaileth with iniquity; yea, he hath conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood.
to the saints and faithful brethren in christ `that are' at colossae: grace to you and peace from god our father.
but if we hope for that which we see not, `then' do we with patience wait for it.
and he said, o jehovah, the god of israel, there is no god like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath; who keepest covenant and lovingkindness with thy servants, that walk before thee with all their heart;
now it came to pass in the fifth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah, king of judah, in the ninth month, that all the people in jerusalem, and all the people that came from the cities of judah unto jerusalem, proclaimed a fast before jehovah.
woe to him that getteth an evil gain for his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the hand of evil!
harness the horses, and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, put on the coats of mail.
and he had possessions of flocks, and possessions of herds, and a great household. and the philistines envied him.
and of the sons of shephatiah, zebadiah the son of michael; and with him fourscore males.
and thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the urim and the thummim; and they shall be upon aaron's heart, when he goeth in before jehovah: and aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of israel upon his heart before jehovah continually.
for ahaz took away a portion out of the house of jehovah, and out of the house of the king and of the princes, and gave it unto the king of assyria: but it helped him not.
but they say, it is in vain; for we will walk after our own devices, and we will do every one after the stubbornness of his evil heart.
so the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets; and he sent all the men of israel every man unto his tent, but retained the three hundred men: and the camp of midian was beneath him in the valley.
and it shall come to pass, when thou shalt show this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, wherefore hath jehovah pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against jehovah our god?
and the seven years of famine began to come, according as joseph had said: and there was famine in all lands; but in all the land of egypt there was bread.
ye are witnesses of these things.
to love jehovah thy god, to obey his voice, and to cleave unto him; for he is thy life, and the length of thy days; that thou mayest dwell in the land which jehovah sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.
as for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water:
and hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of israel, neither hath defiled his neighbor's wife, neither hath come near to a woman in her impurity,
and hezekiah slept with his fathers; and manasseh his son reigned in his stead.
therefore thus saith jehovah, the god of hosts, the lord: wailing shall be in all the broad ways; and they shall say in all the streets, alas! alas! and they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful in lamentation to wailing.
for by the last words of david the sons of levi were numbered, from twenty years old and upward.
many will entreat the favor of the liberal man; and every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts.
and when the men of israel saw that abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place.
ye leave the commandment of god, and hold fast the tradition of men.
have this mind in you, which was also in christ jesus:
blessed be jehovah, the god of israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. and all the people said, amen, and praised jehovah.
for god so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have eternal life.
they make oil within the walls of these men; they tread `their' winepresses, and suffer thirst.
what then is apollos? and what is paul? ministers through whom ye believed; and each as the lord gave to him.
though these three men were in it, as i live, saith the lord jehovah, they should deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only should be delivered, but the land should be desolate.
but he again denied it. and after a little while again they that stood by said to peter, of a truth thou art `one' of them; for thou art a galilaean.
and all the peoples of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of jehovah; and they shall be afraid of thee.
now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth.
offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in jehovah.
but when pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them, as jehovah had spoken.
how fair and how pleasant art thou, o love, for delights!
shimei the son of ela, in benjamin;
of the tribe of simeon, shaphat the son of hori.
and when the seventh month was come, and the children of israel were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to jerusalem.
and he wrote in the letter, saying, set ye uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.
for by these he judgeth the peoples; he giveth food in abundance.
the rod and reproof give wisdom; but a child left to himself causeth shame to his mother.
and thou shalt make staves of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold.
and as soon as we had heard it, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more spirit in any man, because of you: for jehovah your god, he is god in heaven above, and on earth beneath.
for thou art a holy people unto jehovah thy god: jehovah thy god hath chosen thee to be a people for his own possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.
and behold, a man from the multitude cried, saying, teacher, i beseech thee to look upon my son; for he is mine only child:
thus saith the lord jehovah, no foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any foreigners that are among the children of israel.
but philip was found at azotus: and passing through he preached the gospel to all the cities, till he came to caesarea.
at that time did king ahaz send unto the kings of assyria to help him.
the hand of jehovah was upon me, and he brought me out in the spirit of jehovah, and set me down in the midst of the valley; and it was full of bones.
to make their land an astonishment, and a perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and shake his head.
consider `and' answer me, o jehovah my god: lighten mine eyes, lest i sleep the `sleep of' death;
ye look at the things that are before your face. if any man trusteth in himself that he is christ's, let him consider this again with himself, that, even as he is christ's, so also are we.
and edom said unto him, thou shalt not pass through me, lest i come out with the sword against thee.
jehovah will fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.
but these rail at whatsoever things they know not: and what they understand naturally, like the creatures without reason, in these things are they destroyed.
the sons of amram: aaron and moses; and aaron was separated, that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons, for ever, to burn incense before jehovah, to minister unto him, and to bless in his name, for ever.
also he built beth-horon the upper, and beth-horon the nether, fortified cities, with walls, gates, and bars;
and iphtah, and ashnah, and nezib,
only luke is with me. take mark, and bring him with thee; for he is useful to me for ministering.
and jacob begat joseph the husband of mary, of whom was born jesus, who is called christ.
and when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and had sat down together, peter sat in the midst of them.
but jehovah was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with abraham, isaac, and jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence as yet.
they shall also strip thee of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.
until the ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most high, and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.
and they are seven kings; the five are fallen, the one is, the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a little while.
and solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.
behold, i have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.
and david was afraid of god that day, saying, how shall i bring the ark of god home to me?
with the pure thou wilt show thyself pure; and with the perverse thou wilt show thyself froward.
for i have kept the ways of jehovah, and have not wickedly departed from my god.
and jehovah said unto moses, hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and i will write upon the tables the words that were on the first tables, which thou brakest.
and from thence it passed along eastward to gath-hepher, to eth-kazin; and it went out at rimmon which stretcheth unto neah;
behold, the eye of jehovah is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his lovingkindness;
the sons of issachar after their families: `of' tola, the family of the tolaites; of puvah, the family of the punites;
for entangled like thorns, and drunken as with their drink, they are consumed utterly as dry stubble.
because christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to god; being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit;
he came therefore again unto cana of galilee, where he made the water wine. and there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at capernaum.
there shall dwell in his tent that which is none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat heard of it, (for he was in egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of king solomon,) that jeroboam returned out of egypt.
and they went through the region of phrygia and galatia, having been forbidden of the holy spirit to speak the word in asia;
yea, in the way of thy judgments, o jehovah, have we waited for thee; to thy name, even to thy memorial `name', is the desire of our soul.
he bindeth the streams that they trickle not; and the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light.
and it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein solomon had built the two houses, the house of jehovah and the king's house,
they shall fear thee while the sun endureth, and so long as the moon, throughout all generations.
till there arose another king over egypt, who knew not joseph.
and he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat; and moses burned it upon the altar.
and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.
and moses said unto hobab, the son of reuel the midianite, moses' father-in-law, we are journeying unto the place of which jehovah said, i will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for jehovah hath spoken good concerning israel.
thus saith jehovah: behold, i will turn again the captivity of jacob's tents, and have compassion on his dwelling-places; and the city shall be builded upon its own hill, and the palace shall be inhabited after its own manner.
and said, o full of all guile and all villany, thou son of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the lord?
and jehovah spake unto moses, after the death of the two sons of aaron, when they drew near before jehovah, and died;
is not this the word that we spake unto thee in egypt, saying, let us alone, that we may serve the egyptians? for it were better for us to serve the egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.
and inasmuch as `it is' not without the taking of an oath
and he stretched forth his hand towards his disciples, and said, behold, my mother and my brethren!
father, i desire that they also whom thou hast given me be with me where i am, that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
these are the sons of dan after their families: of shuham, the family of the shuhamites. these are the families of dan after their families.
and when he was departed thence, he lighted on jehonadab the son of rechab coming to meet him; and he saluted him, and said to him, is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? and jehonadab answered, it is. if it be, give me thy hand. and he gave him his hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.
and jehovah appeared unto abram, and said, unto thy seed will i give this land: and there builded he an altar unto jehovah, who appeared unto him.
the son of elkanah, the son of joel, the son of azariah, the son of zephaniah,
for the lamb that is in the midst of the throne shall be their shepherd, and shall guide them unto fountains of waters of life: and god shall wipe away every tear from their eyes.
and hiram sent to solomon, saying, i have heard `the message' which thou hast sent unto me: i will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.
and they took him, and cast him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him.
and jehovah raised up an adversary unto solomon, hadad the edomite: he was of the king's seed in edom.
and again he sent unto him another captain of fifty and his fifty. and he answered and said unto him, o man of god, thus hath the king said, come down quickly.
and he told her all his heart, and said unto her, there hath not come a razor upon my head; for i have been a nazirite unto god from my mother's womb: if i be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and i shall become weak, and be like any other man.
and upon all the cedars of lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of bashan,
and i will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, that have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before me, when they cut the calf in twain and passed between the parts thereof;
it stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.
and when jacob made an end of charging his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.
so amasa went to call `the men of' judah together; but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed him.
thou shalt not abhor an edomite; for he is thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an egyptian, because thou wast a sojourner in his land.
so then he hath mercy on whom he will, and whom he will be hardeneth.
and the sons of merari: mahli and mushi. these are the families of the levites according to their generations.
and jehovah said unto me, go again, love a woman beloved of `her' friend, and an adulteress, even as jehovah loveth the children of israel, though they turn unto other gods, and love cakes of raisins.
and when they were departed for him (for they left him very sick), his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died; and they buried him in the city of david, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.
and they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them.
which, when it was filled, they drew up on the beach; and they sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but the bad they cast away.
thus saith jehovah, the people that were left of the sword found favor in the wilderness; even israel, when i went to cause him to rest.
behold, i know your thoughts, and the devices wherewith ye would wrong me.
`even he', whose coming is according to the working of satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,
and when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
and he turned unto her by the way, and said, come, i pray thee, let me come in unto thee: for he knew not that she was his daughter-in-law. and she said, what wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?
aristarchus my fellow-prisoner saluteth you, and mark, the cousin of barnabas (touching whom ye received commandments; if he come unto you, receive him),
to which end we also pray always for you, that our god may count you worthy of your calling, and fulfil every desire of goodness and `every' work of faith, with power;
and david said to abishai, now will sheba the son of bichri do us more harm than did absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fortified cities, and escape out of our sight.
for i am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to harm thee: for i have much people in this city.
your gold and your silver are rusted; and their rust shall be for a testimony against you, and shall eat your flesh as fire. ye have laid up your treasure in the last days.
ephraim hath provoked to anger most bitterly: therefore shall his blood be left upon him, and his reproach shall his lord return unto him.
behold, god is my salvation; i will trust, and will not be afraid; for jehovah, `even' jehovah, is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation.
and they slew every one his man; and the syrians fled, and israel pursued them: and ben-hadad the king of syria escaped on a horse with horsemen.
and it came to pass, as they fled from before israel, while they were at the descent of beth-horon, that jehovah cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto azekah, and they died: they were more who died with the hailstones than they whom the children of israel slew with the sword.
and in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, `and' its blossoms shot forth; `and' the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:
thou art filled with shame, and not glory: drink thou also, and be as one uncircumcised; the cup of jehovah's right hand shall come round unto thee, and foul shame shall be upon thy glory.
now these were more noble than those in thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of the mind, examining the scriptures daily, whether these things were so.
and ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.
thus saith jehovah: as the shepherd rescueth out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, so shall the children of israel be rescued that sit in samaria in the corner of a couch, and on the silken cushions of a bed.
and he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome; but the noise of them that sing do i hear.
woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!
and jehovah said unto moses, thus thou shalt say unto the children of israel, ye yourselves have seen that i have talked with you from heaven.
another parable set he before them, saying, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field:
then said jeremiah, it is false; i am not falling away to the chaldeans. but he hearkened not to him; so irijah laid hold on jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.
but what i do, that i will do, that i may cut off occasion from them that desire an occasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.
what wilt thou that i should do unto thee? and he said, lord, that i may receive my sight.
with my lips have i declared all the ordinances of thy mouth.
he was a mighty hunter before jehovah: wherefore it is said, like nimrod a mighty hunter before jehovah.
and all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun the goats' `hair'.
trouble and anguish have taken hold on me; `yet' thy commandments are my delight.
when the wicked are increased, transgression increaseth; but the righteous shall look upon their fall.
and terah lived seventy years, and begat abram, nahor, and haran.
and the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire, for a sweet savor; all the fat is jehovah's.
and their south border was from the uttermost part of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh southward;
and joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
thou shalt not suffer a sorceress to live.
and a second like `unto it' is this, thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
and out of the tribe of reuben, bezer with its suburbs, and jahaz with its suburbs,
but the jews, being moved with jealousy, took unto them certain vile fellows of the rabble, and gathering a crowd, set the city on an uproar; and assaulting the house of jason, they sought to bring them forth to the people.
but take ye heed: behold, i have told you all things beforehand.
and it shall be upon aaron to minister: and the sound thereof shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before jehovah, and when he cometh out, that he die not.
and the word of jehovah came unto zechariah, saying,
and i will bring back the captivity of egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of pathros, into the land of their birth; and they shall be there a base kingdom.
jehovah, how are mine adversaries increased! many are they that rise up against me.
i was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
i hate them with perfect hatred: they are become mine enemies.
they are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
wherefore also i came without gainsaying, when i was sent for. i ask therefore with what intent ye sent for me.
the other disciples therefore said unto him, we have seen the lord. but he said unto them, except i shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, i will not believe.
when ephraim spake, there was trembling; he exalted himself in israel; but when he offended in baal, he died.
and he brake down the tower of penuel, and slew the men of the city.
and it is come to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the lord jehovah,)
they shall be put to shame, yea, confounded, all of them; they shall go into confusion together that are makers of idols.
as valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river-side, as lign-aloes which jehovah hath planted, as cedar-trees beside the waters.
and in the seventh year jehoiada sent and fetched the captains over hundreds of the carites and of the guard, and brought them to him into the house of jehovah; and he made a covenant with them, and took an oath of them in the house of jehovah, and showed them the king's son.
all that found them have devoured them; and their adversaries said, we are not guilty, because they have sinned against jehovah, the habitation of righteousness, even jehovah, the hope of their fathers.
he that dasheth in pieces is come up against thee: keep the fortress, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily.
of ozni, the family of the oznites; of eri, the family of the erites;
and they were saying among themselves, who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the tomb?
praising god, and having favor with all the people. and the lord added to them day by day those that were saved.
for the law worketh wrath; but where there is no law, neither is there transgression.
inquire, i pray thee, of jehovah for us; for nebuchadrezzar king of babylon maketh war against us: peradventure jehovah will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.
rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the valley of the arnon: behold, i have given into thy hand sihon the amorite, king of heshbon, and his land; begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.
now these are the generations of esau (the same is edom).
but the seventh day is a sabbath unto jehovah thy god: `in it' thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:
but if ye have respect of persons, ye commit sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
and he hath seen a man named ananias coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight.
and he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honor: and solomon his son reigned in his stead.
a man's heart deviseth his way; but jehovah directeth his steps.
so the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.
and your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but god suffered him not to hurt me.
in the fiftieth year of azariah king of judah pekahiah the son of menahem began to reign over israel in samaria, `and reigned' two years.
and there will i nourish thee; for there are yet five years of famine; lest thou come to poverty, thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast.
for i am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers,
and this is the writing that was inscribed: mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.
the jews took up stones again to stone him.
and he came into all the region round about the jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance unto remission of sins;
for ye are all sons of god, through faith, in christ jesus.
they go from strength to strength; every one of them appeareth before god in zion.
o jehovah, thou hast brought up my soul from sheol; thou hast kept me alive, that i should not go down to the pit.
and they that stood by said, revilest thou god's high priest?
but ye say, if a man shall say to his father or his mother, that wherewith thou mightest have been profited by me is corban, that is to say, given `to god';
but when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? none of his righteous deeds that he hath done shall be remembered: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.
and when they measured it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
and his name shall be called in israel, the house of him that hath his shoe loosed.
and, behold, there are the courses of the priests and the levites, for all the service of the house of god: and there shall be with thee in all manner of work every willing man that hath skill, for any manner of service: also the captains and all the people will be wholly at thy commandment.
i have called unto thee; save me, and i shall observe thy testimonies.
and the singers the sons of asaph were in their place, according to the commandment of david, and asaph, and heman, and jeduthun the king's seer; and the porters were at every gate: they needed not to depart from their service; for their brethren the levites prepared for them.
and through him to reconcile all things unto himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross; through him, `i say', whether things upon the earth, or things in the heavens.
and asked them, saying, is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?
and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. psalm 140 for the chief musician. a psalm of david.
and thou shalt put the mercy-seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
and jehoash did that which was right in the eyes of jehovah all his days wherein jehoiada the priest instructed him.
but if what i would not, that i do, i consent unto the law that it is good.
and jonathan answered saul his father, and said unto him, wherefore should he be put to death? what hath he done?
and he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.
let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with jehovah; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye tithe mint and anise and cummin, and have left undone the weightier matters of the law, justice, and mercy, and faith: but these ye ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone.
these uncovered her nakedness; they took her sons and her daughters; and her they slew with the sword: and she became a byword among women; for they executed judgments upon her.
wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;
jehovah repented concerning this: it shall not be, saith jehovah.
and of the tribe of the children of dan a prince, bukki the son of jogli.
and he sent them to lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses; a month they were in lebanon, and two months at home; and adoniram was over the men subject to taskwork.
and there came forth a spirit, and stood before jehovah, and said, i will entice him.
turn thou us unto thee, o jehovah, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old.
and the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before jehovah; and the bullock shall be killed before jehovah.
and he must needs pass through samaria.
it is high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than sheol; what canst thou know?
let him know, that he who converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins.
behold, we call them blessed that endured: ye have heard of the patience of job, and have seen the end of the lord, how that the lord is full of pity, and merciful.
and they said every one to his fellow, come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. so they cast lots, and the lot fell upon jonah.
in the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.
for, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that play the harlot, `departing' from thee.
and those that are to be redeemed of them from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary (the same is twenty gerahs).
no man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. ye cannot serve god and mammon.
and their prince shall be of themselves, and their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them; and i will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is he that hath had boldness to approach unto me? saith jehovah.
moreover abishai the son of zeruiah smote of the edomites in the valley of salt eighteen thousand.
and the people stood afar off, and moses drew near unto the thick darkness where god was.
teach me thy way, o jehovah; i will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.
and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering; and all the blood thereof shall he pour out at the base of the altar:
i love thee, o jehovah, my strength.
therefore jehovah god sent him forth from the garden of eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.
jesus saith unto them, did ye never read in the scriptures, the stone which the builders rejected, the same was made the head of the corner; this was from the lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes?
doth not the ear try words, even as the palate tasteth its food?
when all israel is come to appear before jehovah thy god in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all israel in their hearing.
and i saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat upon the horse, and against his army.
and he saith unto him, friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding-garment? and he was speechless.
and there was a strife between the herdsmen of abram's cattle and the herdsmen of lot's cattle: and the canaanite and the perizzite dwelt then in the land.
take heed, brethren, lest haply there shall be in any one of you an evil heart of unbelief, in falling away from the living god:
and i will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them:
that thou shalt take up this parable against the king of babylon, and say, how hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased!
when the priests enter in, then shall they not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but there they shall lay their garments wherein they minister; for they are holy: and they shall put on other garments, and shall approach to that which pertaineth to the people.
i say it not to condemn `you': for i have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die together and live together.
and he cast four rings for the four ends of the grating of brass, to be places for the staves.
hearken: behold, the sower went forth to sow:
and the levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons.
and they came unto him, and said, hail, king of the jews! and they struck him with their hands.
a son honoreth his father, and a servant his master: if then i am a father, where is mine honor? and if i am a master, where is my fear? saith jehovah of hosts unto you, o priests, that despise my name. and ye say, wherein have we despised thy name?
let him not trust in vanity, deceiving himself; for vanity shall be his recompense.
son of man, what is the vine-tree more than any tree, the vine-branch which is among the trees of the forest?
and he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, though i fear not god, nor regard man;
and his oblation was one silver platter, the weight whereof was a hundred and thirty `shekels', one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
and the fifth angel sounded, and i saw a star from heaven fallen unto the earth: and there was given to him the key of the pit of the abyss.
my father peradventure will feel me, and i shall seem to him as a deceiver. and i shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
give glory to jehovah your god, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.
and they that are in the flesh cannot please god.
and with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were piled up, the floods stood upright as a heap; the deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea.
but when the comforter is come, whom i will send unto you from the father, `even' the spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the father, he shall bear witness of me:
and one of the multitude answered him, teacher, i brought unto thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit;
therefore thus saith the lord jehovah unto them: behold, i, even i, will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep.
even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise; when he shutteth his lips, he is `esteemed as' prudent.
and it came to pass, that when isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called esau his elder son, and said unto him, my son. and he said unto him, here am i.
the disciples say unto him, if the case of the man is so with his wife, it is not expedient to marry.
for am i now seeking the favor of men, or of god? or am i striving to please men? if i were still pleasing men, i should not be a servant of christ.
now the rest of the acts of jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
and after that went the levites in to do their service in the tent of meeting before aaron, and before his sons: as jehovah had commanded moses concerning the levites, so did they unto them.
and that most of the brethren in the lord, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word of god without fear.
when i break your staff of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.
neither doth one thrust another; they march every one in his path; and they burst through the weapons, and break not off `their course'.
and also their gods, with their molten images, `and' with their goodly vessels of silver and of gold, shall he carry captive into egypt; and he shall refrain some years from the king of the north.
there is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand among all the sons that she hath brought up.
according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, there were eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
and the angel said unto me, wherefore didst thou wonder? i will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and the ten horns.
so they drew near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp, as moses had said.
i robbed other churches, taking wages `of them' that i might minister unto you;
and the seers shall be put to shame, and the diviners confounded; yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of god.
they therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word of the lord, returned to jerusalem, and preached the gospel to many villages of the samaritans.
and thou shalt weave the coat in checker work of fine linen, and thou shalt make a mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make a girdle, the work of the embroiderer.
and he said unto me, what seest thou? and i answered, i see a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.
and death and hades were cast into the lake of fire. this is the second death, `even' the lake of fire.
and he came in the spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child jesus, that they might do concerning him after the custom of the law,
and the king went forth, and all his household after him. and the king left ten women, that were concubines, to keep the house.
and there came a writing to him from elijah the prophet, saying, thus saith jehovah, the god of david thy father, because thou hast not walked in the ways of jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of asa king of judah,
wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished; but he that gathereth by labor shall have increase.
and now, behold, i go bound in the spirit unto jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there:
(and he bade them teach the children of judah `the song of' the bow: behold, it is written in the book of jashar):
and eli blessed elkanah and his wife, and said, jehovah give thee seed of this woman for the petition which was asked of jehovah. and they went unto their own home.
and joshua discomfited amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye are otherwise minded, this also shall god reveal unto you:
eliphelet the son of ahasbai, the son of the maacathite, eliam the son of ahithophel the gilonite,
i will scatter them also among the nations, whom neither they nor their fathers have known; and i will send the sword after them, till i have consumed them.
give us help against the adversary; for vain is the help of man.
whensoever i go unto spain (for i hope to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first in some measure i shall have been satisfied with your company)--
there hath no temptation taken you but such as man can bear: but god is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation make also the way of escape, that ye may be able to endure it.
but if he say thus, i have no delight in thee; behold, here am i, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him.
and the first came forth red, all over like a hairy garment. and they called his name esau.
and in the feasts and in the solemnities the meal-offering shall be an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
mishmannah the fourth, jeremiah the fifth,
then david inquired of jehovah yet again. and jehovah answered him, and said, arise, go down to keilah; for i will deliver the philistines into thy hand.
and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his name israel.
the nations raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he spake with him, a pillar of stone: and he poured out a drink-offering thereon, and poured oil thereon.
now it came to pass on the day when the sons of god came to present themselves before jehovah, that satan also came among them.
then came eliakim the son of hilkiah, that was over the household, and shebna the scribe, and joah, the son of asaph, the recorder, to hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of rabshakeh.
and the angel cast his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vintage of the earth, and cast it into the winepress, the great `winepress', of the wrath of god.
at my first defence no one took my part, but all forsook me: may it not be laid to their account.
and jesus looking upon `them' said to them, with men this is impossible; but with god all things are possible.
that ye must turn away this day from following jehovah? and it will be, seeing ye rebel to-day against jehovah, that to-morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of israel.
ye are my friends, if ye do the things which i command you.
the children of hanan, the children of giddel, the children of gahar,
it is better to dwell in a desert land, than with a contentious and fretful woman.
and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;
in the four and twentieth `day' of the ninth `month', in the second year of darius, came the word of jehovah by haggai the prophet, saying,
then said absalom, if not, i pray thee, let my brother amnon go with us. and the king said unto him, why should he go with thee?
is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is brought upon me, wherewith jehovah hath afflicted `me' in the day of his fierce anger.
so he hearkened unto them in this matter, and proved them ten days.
but thou hast saved us from our adversaries, and hast put them to shame that hate us.
and the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stone and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup full of abominations, even the unclean things of her fornication,
so again have i thought in these days to do good unto jerusalem and to the house of judah: fear ye not.
and the priest shall make atonement for the soul that erreth, when he sinneth unwittingly, before jehovah, to make atonement for him; and he shall be forgiven.
and shimei said unto the king, the saying is good: as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do. and shimei dwelt in jerusalem many days.
how precious also are thy thoughts unto me, o god! how great is the sum of them!
but the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul from the liver of the sin-offering, he burnt upon the altar; as jehovah commanded moses.
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?
are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all `workers of' miracles?
then said he unto all israel, be ye on one side, and i and jonathan my son will be on the other side. and the people said unto saul, do what seemeth good unto thee.
and he was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was reading the prophet isaiah.
and next to him jehozabad and with him a hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for war.
then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of babylon to riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.
leave off, ye simple ones, and live; and walk in the way of understanding.
but in the place whither they have led him captive, there shall he die, and he shall see this land no more.
and they brought it. and he saith unto them, whose is this image and superscription? and they said unto him, caesar's.
and pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as jehovah had spoken.
wherefore should i fear in the days of evil, when iniquity at my heels compasseth me about?
and paul and barnabas spake out boldly, and said, it was necessary that the word of god should first be spoken to you. seeing ye thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the gentiles.
but when herod's birthday came, the daughter of herodias danced in the midst, and pleased herod.
hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thy heart in the way.
but for the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, their part `shall be' in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.
now david the son of jesse reigned over all israel.
thus saith jehovah, behold, i will give pharaoh hophra king of egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life; as i gave zedekiah king of judah into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, who was his enemy, and sought his life.
and as we tarried there some days, there came down from judaea a certain prophet, named agabus.
and his lord commended the unrighteous steward because he had done wisely: for the sons of this world are for their own generation wiser than the sons of the light.
that thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when i have forgiven thee all that thou hast done, saith the lord jehovah.
and i took my staff beauty, and cut it asunder, that i might break my covenant which i had made with all the peoples.
for wickedness burneth as the fire; it devoureth the briers and thorns; yea, it kindleth in the thickets of the forest, and they roll upward in a column of smoke.
and those that encamp next unto him shall be the tribe of asher: and the prince of the children of asher shall be pagiel the son of ochran.
a prudent man concealeth knowledge; but the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.
and there was a wall round about in them, round about the four, and boiling-places were made under the walls round about.
and they arose, and went to ziph before saul: but david and his men were in the wilderness of maon, in the arabah on the south of the desert.
behold, god is great, and we know him not; the number of his years is unsearchable.
howbeit festus answered, that paul was kept in charge at caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart `thither' shortly.
therefore, behold, i will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder; and the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.
wherefore receive ye one another, even as christ also received you, to the glory of god.
then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was toward the house.
the portion of jacob is not like these; for he is the former of all things; and israel is the tribe of his inheritance: jehovah of hosts is his name.
the overseer also of the levites at jerusalem was uzzi the son of bani, the son of hashabiah, the son of mattaniah, the son of mica, of the sons of asaph, the singers, over the business of the house of god.
and the oxen were thirty and six thousand; of which jehovah's tribute was threescore and twelve.
therefore, behold, i will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil which i will bring upon this place. and they brought the king word again.
be thou exalted, o god, above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth.
for we cannot but speak the things which we saw and heard.
this man had been instructed in the way of the lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spake and taught accurately the things concerning jesus, knowing only the baptism of john:
and to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely offered unto the god of israel, whose habitation is in jerusalem,
show me a denarius. whose image and superscription hath it? and they said, caesar's.
and the disciples came, and said unto him, why speakest thou unto them in parables?
and ye shall keep it a feast unto jehovah seven days in the year: it is a statute for ever throughout your generations; ye shall keep it in the seventh month.
for i know the thoughts that i think toward you, saith jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you hope in your latter end.
whose voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying, yet once more will i make to tremble not the earth only, but also the heaven.
wherefore be ye not foolish, but understand what the will of the lord is.
the show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as sodom, they hide it not. woe unto their soul! for they have done evil unto themselves.
and he said unto me, son of man, i send thee to the children of israel, to nations that are rebellious, which have rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against me even unto this very day.
i, jehovah, have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and i will do it: i will not go back, neither will i spare, neither will i repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the lord jehovah.
what do ye devise against jehovah? he will make a full end; affliction shall not rise up the second time.
and we journeyed from horeb, and went through all that great and terrible wilderness which ye saw, by the way to the hill-country of the amorites, as jehovah our god commanded us; and we came to kadesh-barnea.
for i will take you from among the nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and will bring you into your own land.
and joseph said unto him, this is the interpretation of it: the three branches are three days;
and jehovah magnified solomon exceedingly in the sight of all israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in israel.
for he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause.
and king ahaz commanded urijah the priest, saying, upon the great altar burn the morning burnt-offering, and the evening meal-offering, and the king's burnt-offering, and his meal-offering, with the burnt-offering of all the people of the land, and their meal-offering, and their drink-offerings; and sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt-offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: but the brazen altar shall be for me to inquire by.
and in the oracle he made two cherubim of olive-wood, each ten cubits high.
(for they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the god of israel; jehovah of hosts is his name):
now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.
he took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful soil; he placed it beside many waters; he set it as a willow-tree.
lie not one to another; seeing that ye have put off the old man with his doings,
and whosoever beareth `aught' of the carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
and they called the name of that place bochim: and they sacrificed there unto jehovah.
of the tribe of gad, geuel the son of machi.
wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great? or wilt thou leave to him thy labor?
and he said unto me, who art thou? and i answered him, i am an amalekite.
moses and aaron among his priests, and samuel among them that call upon his name; they called upon jehovah, and he answered them.
but he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
and i will stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate and waste, from the wilderness toward diblah, throughout all their habitations: and they shall know that i am jehovah.
but a certain one of them that stood by drew his sword, and smote the servant of the high priest, and struck off his ear.
thou hast seen `it'; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand: the helpless committeth `himself' unto thee; thou hast been the helper of the fatherless.
searching what `time' or what manner of time the spirit of christ which was in them did point unto, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of christ, and the glories that should follow them.
and the sons of noah, that went forth from the ark, were shem, and ham, and japheth: and ham is the father of canaan.
and unto adam he said, because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which i commanded thee, saying, thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in toil shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;
and when ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is no evil! and when ye offer the lame and sick, it is no evil! present it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee? or will he accept thy person? saith jehovah of hosts.
and when abigail saw david, she hasted, and alighted from her ass, and fell before david on her face, and bowed herself to the ground.
for there are three who bear witness, the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and the three agree in one.
now the rest of the acts of solomon, first and last, are they not written in the history of nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of ahijah the shilonite, and in the visions of iddo the seer concerning jeroboam the son of nebat?
but without thy mind i would do nothing; that thy goodness should not be as of necessity, but of free will.
then the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half-tribe of manasseh answered, and spake unto the heads of the thousands of israel,
thou shalt make thee no molten gods.
hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye dismayed at their revilings.
and the king said again unto esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, what is thy petition, queen esther? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.
lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
and confirmed the same unto jacob for a statute, to israel for an everlasting covenant,
shall the throne of wickedness have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by statute?
and the children of gad and the children of reuben spake unto moses, saying, thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.
and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, drink, and i will give thy camels drink also. so i drank, and she made the camels drink also.
art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.
and she brought up one of her whelps: he became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey; he devoured men.
and i will bring you in unto the land which i sware to give to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give it you for a heritage: i am jehovah.
kedemoth with its suburbs, and mephaath with its suburbs; four cities.
brethren, i could not myself yet to have laid hold: but one thing `i do', forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching forward to the things which are before,
for his god doth instruct him aright, `and' doth teach him.
therefore, behold, the days come, saith jehovah, that i will send unto him them that pour off, and they shall pour him off; and they shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles in pieces.
but he turned, and rebuked them.
the salutation of me paul with mine own hand.
the plowers plowed upon my back; they made long their furrows.
and joseph laid up grain as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left off numbering; for it was without number.
also, that the soul be without knowledge is not good; and he that hasteth with his feet sinneth.
but the boat was now in the midst of the sea, distressed by the waves; for the wind was contrary.
for these are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly.
hear, o jehovah, when i cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer me.
then said david, o jehovah, the god of israel, thy servant hath surely heard that saul seeketh to come to keilah, to destroy the city for my sake.
and saying, sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good tidings, that ye should turn from these vain things unto a living god, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that in them is:
then jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, put away the foreign gods that are among you, and purify yourselves, and change your garments:
his mouth was smooth as butter, but his heart was war: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.
and upon this came his disciples; and they marvelled that he was speaking with a woman; yet no man said, what seekest thou? or, why speakest thou with her?
and they shall know that i am jehovah, when i shall disperse them among the nations, and scatter them through the countries.
and said, remember now, o jehovah, i beseech thee, how i have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. and hezekiah wept sore.
the second woe is past: behold, the third woe cometh quickly.
for how knowest thou, o wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, o husband, whether thou shalt save thy wife?
and unto enoch was born irad: and irad begat mehujael: and mehujael begat methushael; and methushael begat lamech.
for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
out of the mouth of the most high cometh there not evil and good?
and she said, no man, lord. and jesus said, neither do i condemn thee: go thy way; from henceforth sin no more.
for jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honor in his own country.
nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, and he turn not from his way; he shall die in his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul.
prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. woe unto us! for the day declineth, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.
and the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain round about jerusalem, and from the villages of the netophathites;
therefore thus saith jehovah, the god of israel, against the shepherds that feed my people: ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them; behold, i will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith jehovah.
wherefore hast thou despised the word of jehovah, to do that which is evil in his sight? thou hast smitten uriah the hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of ammon.
in the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: the hand of every one that is in misery shall come upon him.
behold, i give of the synagogue of satan, of them that say they are jews, and they are not, but do lie; behold, i will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that i have loved thee.
so the house of israel shall know that i am jehovah their god, from that day and forward.
therefore i will profane the princes of the sanctuary; and i will make jacob a curse, and israel a reviling.
now i, nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the king of heaven; for all his works are truth, and his ways justice; and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.
son of man, prophesy, and say, thus saith the lord jehovah: wail ye, alas for the day!
and it shall be as when a hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount zion.
yea and all the prophets from samuel and them that followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of these days.
how long wilt thou sleep, o sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?
sheol and abaddon are before jehovah: how much more then the hearts of the children of men!
and the king went to gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt-offerings did solomon offer upon that altar.
when thou gatherest `the grapes of' thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it after thee: it shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
then saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of ziph, having three thousand chosen men of israel with him, to seek david in the wilderness of ziph.
though i was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: howbeit i obtained mercy, because i did it ignorantly in unbelief;
for there are no pangs in their death; but their strength is firm.
in that day, saith jehovah of hosts, will i take thee, o zerubbabel, my servant, the son of shealtiel, saith jehovah, and will make thee as a signet; for i have chosen thee, saith jehovah of hosts.
i have digged and drunk water, and with the sole of my feet will i dry up all the rivers of egypt.
he hath caused the shafts of his quiver to enter into my reins.
and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of a spiritual rock that followed them: and the rock was christ.
and one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before jehovah.
and he asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, saying, his name is john. and they marvelled all.
and in like manner the spirit also helpeth our infirmity: for we know not how to pray as we ought; but the spirit himself maketh intercession for `us' with groanings which cannot be uttered;
and foreigners shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath i smote thee, but in my favor have i had mercy on thee.
now therefore, o god of israel, let thy word, i pray thee, be verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant david my father.
and pilate spake unto them again, desiring to release jesus;
and he built fortified cities in judah; for the land was quiet, and he had no war in those years, because jehovah had given him rest.
notwithstanding, the land shall be divided by lot: according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.
in that same hour he rejoiced in the holy spirit, and said, i thank thee, o father, lord of heaven and earth, that thou didst hide these things from the wise and understanding, and didst reveal them unto babes: yea, father; for so it was well-pleasing in thy sight.
and he that sweareth by the heaven, sweareth by the throne of god, and by him that sitteth thereon.
on the eighth day he sent the people away; and they blessed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that jehovah had showed unto david his servant, and to israel his people.
have all gifts of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?
but not as the trespass, so also `is' the free gift. for if by the trespass of the one the many died, much more did the grace of god, and the gift by the grace of the one man, jesus christ, abound unto the many.
behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thine eyes are `as' doves behind thy veil. thy hair is as a flock of goats, that lie along the side of mount gilead.
he cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, a band of angels of evil.
and when he came, lo, eli was sitting upon his seat by the wayside watching; for his heart trembled for the ark of god. and when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.
and upon the table of showbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls and the cups wherewith to pour out; and the continual bread shall be thereon:
and upon the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread, paul discoursed with them, intending to depart on the morrow; and prolonged his speech until midnight.
then said i, woe is me! for i am undone; because i am a man of unclean lips, and i dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the king, jehovah of hosts.
and now saith jehovah that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring jacob again to him, and that israel be gathered unto him (for i am honorable in the eyes of jehovah, and my god is become my strength);
and saul clad david with his apparel, and he put a helmet of brass upon his head, and he clad him with a coat of mail.
and if one person sin unwittingly, then he shall offer a she-goat a year old for a sin-offering.
woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, even while for a pretence ye make long prayers: therefore ye shall receive greater condemnation.
one he-goat, to make atonement for you.
for thou shalt forget thy misery; thou shalt remember it as waters that are passed away,
and though this house is so high, yet shall every one that passeth by it be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, why hath jehovah done thus unto this land, and to this house?
and it is given to be furbished, that it may be handled: the sword, it is sharpened, yea, it is furbished, to give it into the hand of the slayer.
jehovah of hosts will defend them; and they shall devour, and shall tread down the sling-stones; and they shall drink, and make a noise as through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, like the corners of the altar.
and we are witnesses of these things; and `so is' the holy spirit, whom god hath given to them that obey him.
so all israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of israel: and judah was carried away captive to babylon for their transgression.
and methuselah lived after he begat lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters.
of judgment, because the prince of this world hath been judged.
nay, my lord, hear me. the field give i thee, and the cave that is therein, i give it thee. in the presence of the children of my people give i it thee. bury thy dead.
oh that my people would hearken unto me, that israel would walk in my ways!
be not afraid of the king of babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith jehovah: for i am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.
be not desirous of his dainties; seeing they are deceitful food.
and balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of balak, get you into your land; for jehovah refuseth to give me leave to go with you.
and joab said, jehovah make his people a hundred times as many as they are: but, my lord the king, are they not all my lord's servants? why doth my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of guilt unto israel?
thus will i make mount seir an astonishment and a desolation; and i will cut off from it him that passeth through and him that returneth.
but the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall have no way to flee; and their hope shall be the giving up of the ghost.
and let the favor of the lord our god be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
i beseech you, brethren, become as i `am', for i also `am become' as ye `are'. ye did me no wrong:
jehovah in the midst of her is righteous; he will not do iniquity; every morning doth he bring his justice to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.
and thou, son of man, prophesy against gog, and say, thus saith the lord jehovah: behold, i am against thee, o gog, prince of rosh, meshech, and tubal:
a continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike:
and the messengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy brother esau, and moreover he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
that the creation itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of god.
if a man find a damsel that is a virgin, that is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found;
and when all the kings that were servants to hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before israel, they made peace with israel, and served them. so the syrians feared to help the children of ammon any more.
and it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of jehovah was against the city with a very great discomfiture: and he smote the men of the city, both small and great; and tumors brake out upon them.
and they shall be an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, and their carcasses ye shall have in abomination.
cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.
and it came to pass that, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt-offering, behold, samuel came; and saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.
and these signs shall accompany them that believe: in my name shall they cast out demons; they shall speak with new tongues;
and he tarried seven days, according to the set time that samuel `had appointed': but samuel came not to gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.
ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill the fatlings; but ye feed not the sheep.
the finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
and i exhort `you' the more exceedingly to do this, that i may be restored to you the sooner.
fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted.
and if thy right eye causeth thee to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not thy whole body be cast into hell.
neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother;
and he brought aaron's sons; and moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot: and moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
i believe, for i will speak: i was greatly afflicted:
and moses told the children of israel according to all that jehovah commanded moses.
and i will stretch out my hand upon judah, and upon all the inhabitants of jerusalem; and i will cut off the remnant of baal from this place, `and' the name of the chemarim with the priests;
come now therefore, and i will send thee unto pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of israel out of egypt.
and she gave him bilhah her handmaid to wife: and jacob went in unto her.
she is empty, and void, and waste; and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and anguish is in all loins, and the faces of them all are waxed pale.
and these all, having had witness borne to them through their faith, received not the promise,
and in the eleventh year, in the month bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. so was he seven years in building it.
and all the elders of israel came: and the levites took up the ark;
and the ransomed of jehovah shall return, and come with singing unto zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
let mine outcasts dwell with thee; as for moab, be thou a covert to him from the face of the destroyer. for the extortioner is brought to nought, destruction ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land.
the length of each curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits the breadth of each curtain: the eleven curtains had one measure.
and by these ye shall become unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcass of them shall be unclean until the even;
at the end of twelve months he was walking in the royal palace of babylon.
he hath not dealt so with any nation; and as for his ordinances, they have not known them. praise ye jehovah.
certain base fellows are gone out from the midst of thee, and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known;
and being let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said unto them.
and reu lived two and thirty years, and begat serug:
now the lord is the spirit: and where the spirit of the lord is, `there' is liberty.
and out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures. and this was their appearance: they had the likeness of a man.
lest strangers be filled with thy strength, and thy labors `be' in the house of an alien,
wise men lay up knowledge; but the mouth of the foolish is a present destruction.
and the men of gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about me by night; me they thought to have slain, and my concubine they forced, and she is dead.
for he had healed many; insomuch that as many as had plagues pressed upon him that they might touch him.
how much better is it to get wisdom than gold! yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than silver.
great are thy tender mercies, o jehovah: quicken me according to thine ordinances.
and they rose up that very hour, and returned to jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,
i press on toward the goal unto the prize of the high calling of god in christ jesus.
when any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, `then' cometh the evil `one', and snatcheth away that which hath been sown in his heart. this is he that was sown by the way side.
defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which i cast out from before you;
and the woman took and spread the covering over the well's mouth, and strewed bruised grain thereon; and nothing was known.
the thoughts of the diligent `tend' only to plenteousness; but every one that is hasty `hasteth' only to want.
then said his servants unto him, what thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.
jesus answered and said unto unto her, if thou knewest the gift of god, and who it is that saith to thee, give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
and the people said unto joshua, jehovah our god will we serve, and unto his voice will we hearken.
and that their children, who have not known, may hear, and learn to fear jehovah your god, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over the jordan to possess it.
and the prince of the fathers' house of the gershonites shall be eliasaph the son of lael.
let love be without hypocrisy. abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good.
thus saith jehovah, the god of israel: i made a covenant with your fathers in the day that i brought them forth out of the land of egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying,
the earth also is polluted under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, violated the statutes, broken the everlasting covenant.
for thus saith jehovah, the god of israel, the jar of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that jehovah sendeth rain upon the earth.
and they said, o jehovah, the god of israel, why is this come to pass in israel, that there should be to-day one tribe lacking in israel?
and they brought that which moses commanded before the tent of meeting: and all the congregation drew near and stood before jehovah.
the finely wrought garments for ministering in the holy place, and the holy garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
howbeit at that time, not knowing god, ye were in bondage to them that by nature are no gods:
then were they all of good cheer, and themselves also took food.
of the sons of gershom, joel the chief, and his brethren a hundred and thirty;
and he entered into a boat, and crossed over, and came into his own city.
now if christ is preached that he hath been raised from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
now therefore stand still, that i may plead with you before jehovah concerning all the righteous acts of jehovah, which he did to you and to your fathers.
and there they preached the gospel.
and herod and pilate became friends with each other that very day: for before they were at enmity between themselves.
and when i was present with you and was in want, i was not a burden on any man; for the brethren, when they came from macedonia, supplied the measure of my want; and in everything i kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and `so' will i keep `myself'.
if i have seen any perish for want of clothing, or that the needy had no covering;
for the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that was a householder, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard.
and he went unto his father's house at ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone: but jotham the youngest son of jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself.
for he said unto judah, let us build these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars; the land is yet before us, because we have sought jehovah our god; we have sought him, and he hath given us rest on every side. so they built and prospered.
and they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another. and isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
so that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the revelation of our lord jesus christ;
but woe unto them that are with child and to them that give suck in those days!
and the hundred talents of silver were for casting the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the veil; a hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
and joshua went up from eglon, and all israel with him, unto hebron; and they fought against it:
and the whole congregation of the children of israel assembled themselves together at shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting there: and the land was subdued before them.
nay but, o man, who art thou that repliest against god? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why didst thou make me thus?
wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which i have commanded in `my' habitation, and honorest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of israel my people?
who were snatched away before their time, whose foundation was poured out as a stream,
cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: i will divide them in jacob, and scatter them in israel.
the soldiers therefore came, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other that was crucified with him:
and jehovah said unto moses, take all the chiefs of the people, and hang them up unto jehovah before the sun, that the fierce anger of jehovah may turn away from israel.
the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flieth in the heavens,
and every day he was teaching in the temple; and every night he went out, and lodged in the mount that is called olivet.
but `it is' not as though the word of god hath come to nought. for they are not all israel, that are of israel:
and that jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to paddan-aram.
better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse in `his' ways, though he be rich.
and when the wine failed, the mother of jesus saith unto him, they have no wine.
then all israel gathered themselves to david unto hebron, saying, behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
and he said unto him, thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.
and the levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and eight thousand.
how much less man, that is a worm! and the son of man, that is a worm!
o ye that love jehovah, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
thus saith the lord jehovah: smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, alas! because of all the evil abominations of the house of israel; for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.
on the twelfth day ahira the son of enan, prince of the children of naphtali:
they shall have like portions to eat, besides that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.
for he established a testimony in jacob, and appointed a law in israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children;
it is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for in six days jehovah made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.
and it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went to a city called nain; and his disciples went with him, and a great multitude.
he delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh no pleasure in the legs of a man.
and the house which i build is great; for great is our god above all gods.
they are like unto children that sit in the marketplace, and call one to another; who say, we piped unto you, and ye did not dance; we wailed, and ye did not weep.
and in process of time shua's daughter, the wife of judah, died; and judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheep-shearers to timnah, he and his friend hirah the adullamite.
i was a father to the needy: and the cause of him that i knew not i searched out.
now there was war between rehoboam and jeroboam all the days of his life.
which having no chief, overseer, or ruler,
and he took the captains over hundreds, and the carites, and the guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king from the house of jehovah, and came by the way of the gate of the guard unto the king's house. and he sat on the throne of the kings.
and rebekah said to isaac, i am weary of my life because of the daughters of heth. if jacob take a wife of the daughters of heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?
then gideon built an altar there unto jehovah, and called it jehovah-shalom: unto this day it is yet in ophrah of the abiezrites.
`which is' a manifest token of the righteous judgment of god; to the end that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of god, for which ye also suffer:
drink no wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, that ye die not: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations:
and it shall be for aaron and his sons as `their' portion for ever from the children of israel; for it is a heave-offering: and it shall be a heave-offering from the children of israel of the sacrifices of their peace-offerings, even their heave-offering unto jehovah.
and put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his grain money. and he did according to the word that joseph had spoken.
and one he-goat for a sin-offering; besides the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof.
for i spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that i brought them out of the land of egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices:
now the acts of rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the histories of shemaiah the prophet and of iddo the seer, after the manner of genealogies? and there were wars between rehoboam and jeroboam continually.
and even these reel with wine, and stagger with strong drink; the priest and the prophet reel with strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they stagger with strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.
then said boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, whose damsel is this?
wherefore girding up the loins of your mind, be sober and set your hope perfectly on the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of jesus christ;
and they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and seized him, and brought him into the council,
and the sons of josiah: the first-born johanan, the second jehoiakim, the third zedekiah, the fourth shallum.
blessed `be' the god and father of our lord jesus christ, who according to his great mercy begat us again unto a living hope by the resurrection of jesus christ from the dead,
thou also, bear thou thine own shame, in that thou hast given judgment for thy sisters; through thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they, they are more righteous that thou: yea, be thou also confounded, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.
i thought it necessary therefore to entreat the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your aforepromised bounty, that the same might be ready as a matter of bounty, and not of extortion.
and he died for all, that they that live should no longer live unto themselves, but unto him who for their sakes died and rose again.
and `abraham' planted a tamarisk tree in beer-sheba, and called there on the name of jehovah, the everlasting god.
so david and his men went by the way; and shimei went along on the hill-side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.
and when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the pharisees and sadducees; and the assembly was divided.
and those that weep, as though they wept not; and those that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and those that buy, as though they possessed not;
and ye took up the tabernacle of moloch, and the star of the god rephan, the figures which ye made to worship them: and i will carry you away beyond babylon.
but the very hairs of your head are all numbered. fear not: ye are of more value than many sparrows.
the word that jeremiah the prophet spake unto baruch the son of neriah, when he wrote these word in a book at the mouth of jeremiah, in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah, king of judah, saying,
a sword is upon the chaldeans, saith jehovah, and upon the inhabitants of babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.
thus shall it be done for each bullock, or for each ram, or for each of the he-lambs, or of the kids.
for god speaketh once, yea twice, `though man' regardeth it not.
but i will send a fire into the house of hazael, and it shall devour the palaces of ben-hadad.
behold, the days come, that i will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house.
all the oxen for the burnt-offering twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the he-lambs a year old twelve, and their meal-offering; and the males of the goats for a sin-offering twelve;
i have remembered thy name, o jehovah, in the night, and have observed thy law.
and the king of israel answered and said, it is according to thy saying, my lord, o king; i am thine, and all that i have.
the children of nebo, fifty and two.
and thou, when thou art made desolate, what wilt thou do? though thou clothest thyself with scarlet, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou enlargest thine eyes with paint, in vain dost thou make thyself fair; `thy' lovers despise thee, they seek thy life.
say, i am your sign: like as i have done, so shall it be done unto them; they shall go into exile, into captivity.
now it came to pass, while he executed the priest's office before god in the order of his course,
the first of the first-fruits of thy ground thou shalt bring unto the house of jehovah thy god. thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
but the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against jebus (the same is jerusalem): and there were with him a couple of asses saddled; his concubine also was with him.
now as he spake, a pharisee asketh him to dine with him: and he went in, and sat down to meat.
and the pavement was by the side of the gates, answerable unto the length of the gates, even the lower pavement.
whom i would fain have kept with me, that in thy behalf he might minister unto me in the bonds of the gospel:
for a fire is kindled in mine anger, and burneth unto the lowest sheol, and devoureth the earth with its increase, and setteth on fire the foundations of the mountains.
now david was old and full of days; and he made solomon his son king over israel.
then pharaoh called for moses and aaron, and said, entreat jehovah, that he take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and i will let the people go, that they may sacrifice unto jehovah.
therefore the lord will not rejoice over their young men, neither will he have compassion on their fatherless and widows; for every one is profane and an evil-doer, and every mouth speaketh folly. for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
and his disciples said unto him, thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, who touched me?
then said boaz, what day thou buyest the field of the hand of naomi, thou must buy it also of ruth the moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.
a people great and tall, the sons of the anakim, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, who can stand before the sons of anak?
and i will scatter the egyptians among the nations, and disperse them through the countries; and they shall know that i am jehovah.
is any among you sick? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the lord:
and in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of baked food for pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
if thou, jehovah, shouldest mark iniquities, o lord, who could stand?
in the thirty and eighth year of azariah king of judah did zechariah the son of jeroboam reign over israel in samaria six months.
and he hath lifted up the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints; even of the children of israel, a people near unto him. praise ye jehovah.
and the tribes of israel sent men through all the tribe of benjamin, saying, what wickedness is this that is come to pass among you?
jesus therefore, knowing all the things that were coming upon him, went forth, and saith unto them, whom seek ye?
this moses whom they refused, saying, who made thee a ruler and a judge? him hath god sent `to be' both a ruler and a deliverer with the hand of the angel that appeared to him in the bush.
nay, much rather, those members of the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary:
and when the woman saw samuel, she cried with a loud voice; and the woman spake to saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me? for thou art saul.
then said david, ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which jehovah hath given unto us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the troop that came against us into our hand.
but when moses went in before jehovah to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out; and he came out, and spake unto the children of israel that which he was commanded.
then there came two women that were harlots, unto the king, and stood before him.
thou preparedst `room' before it, and it took deep root, and filled the land.
for thou art the glory of their strength; and in thy favor our horn shall be exalted.
and they fetched forth uriah out of egypt, and brought him unto jehoiakim the king, who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.
but god will shoot at them; with an arrow suddenly shall they be wounded.
six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.
therefore thus saith jehovah of hosts: because ye have not heard my words,
and jesus answered unto him, it is written, man shall not live by bread alone.
and zechariah, and aziel, and shemiramoth, and jehiel, and unni, and eliab, and maaseiah, and benaiah, with psalteries set to alamoth;
and jehovah said unto satan, from whence comest thou? and satan answered jehovah, and said, from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
behold, ye are of nothing, and your work is of nought; an abomination is he that chooseth you.
and he gathered together the priests and the levites, and said to them, go out unto the cities of judah, and gather of all israel money to repair the house of your god from year to year; and see that ye hasten the matter. howbeit the levites hastened it not.
i will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he-goats.
of moab. thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel: woe unto nebo! for it is laid waste; kiriathaim is put to shame, it is taken; misgab is put to shame and broken down.
and say, thus saith the lord jehovah: a great eagle with great wings and long pinions, full of feathers, which had divers colors, came unto lebanon, and took the top of the cedar:
neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
and the princes were wroth with jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of jonathan the scribe; for they had made that the prison.
and shechem the son of hamor the hivite, the prince of the land, saw her; and he took her, and lay with her, and humbled her.
and jehovah spake unto moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. and he turned again into the camp: but his minister joshua, the son of nun, a young man, departed not out of the tent.
and he put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the church,
that shaketh the earth out of its place, and the pillars thereof tremble;
but when the young man heard the saying, he went away sorrowful; for he was one that had great possessions.
the pendants, and the bracelets, and the mufflers;
who knoweth not in all these, that the hand of jehovah hath wrought this,
when therefore he was gone out, jesus saith, now is the son of man glorified, and god is glorified in him;
and say, what was thy mother? a lioness: she couched among lions, in the midst of the young lions she nourished her whelps.
ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.
finally, brethren, farewell. be perfected; be comforted; be of the same mind; live in peace: and the god of love and peace shall be with you.
and he dreamed. and behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven. and behold, the angels of god ascending and descending on it.
also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned job.
so they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them near to gibeah, which belongeth to benjamin.
when christ, `who is' our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye also with him be manifested in glory.
nay, my sons; for it is no good report that i hear: ye make jehovah's people to transgress.
forbidding to marry, `and commanding' to abstain from meats, which god created to be received with thanksgiving by them that believe and know the truth.
break their teeth, o god, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the young lions, o jehovah.
in the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot black horses;
for in the day of trouble he will keep me secretly in his pavilion: in the covert of his tabernacle will he hide me; he will lift me up upon a rock.
and joel, and jehu the son of joshibiah, the son of seraiah, the son of asiel,
awake, awake, stand up, o jerusalem, that hast drunk at the hand of jehovah the cup of his wrath; thou hast drunken the bowl of the cup of staggering, and drained it.
for the kingdom is jehovah's; and he is the ruler over the nations.
as saith the proverb of the ancients, out of the wicked cometh forth wickedness; but my hand shall not be upon thee.
thou hast increased the nation, o jehovah, thou hast increased the nation; thou art glorified; thou hast enlarged all the borders of the land.
now this is the copy of the letter that the king artaxerxes gave unto ezra the priest, the scribe, even the scribe of the words of the commandments of jehovah, and of his statutes to israel:
yet through the scent of water it will bud, and put forth boughs like a plant.
and the brazen altar, which was before jehovah, he brought from the forefront of the house, from between his altar and the house of jehovah, and put it on the north side of his altar.
for when ye were servants of sin, ye were free in regard of righteousness.
and they answered jesus, and said, we know not. he also said unto them, neither tell i you by what authority i do these things.
wherefore i saw that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him `back' to see what shall be after him?
(after that jeconiah the king, and the queen-mother, and the eunuchs, `and' the princes of judah and jerusalem, and the craftsmen, and the smiths, were departed from jerusalem,)
and they took their journey from succoth, and encamped in etham, in the edge of the wilderness.
that make a man an offender in `his' cause, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just with a thing of nought.
and now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are built up; yea, they tempt god, and escape.
the bows of the mighty men are broken; and they that stumbled are girded with strength.
let destruction come upon him unawares; and let his net that he hath hid catch himself: with destruction let him fall therein.
but the noble deviseth noble things; and in noble things shall he continue.
for our exhortation `is' not of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile:
how long, o god, shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?
praise ye jehovah; for it is good to sing praises unto our god; for it is pleasant, `and' praise is comely.
remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt-sacrifice; selah
now when all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of babylon had made gedaliah governor, they came to gedaliah to mizpah, even ishmael the son of nethaniah, and johanan the son of kareah, and seraiah the son of tanhumeth the netophathite, and jaazaniah the son of the maacathite, they and their men.
the prophet that prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that jehovah hath truly sent him.
therefore thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel, behold, i will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.
and when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of israel went onward, throughout all their journeys:
or know ye not that your body is a temple of the holy spirit which is in you, which ye have from god? and ye are not your own;
and whether one member suffereth, all the members suffer with it; or `one' member is honored, all the members rejoice with it.
and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south. and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
for there is a disannulling of a foregoing commandment because of its weakness and unprofitableness
the children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.
then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy before jehovah; for he cometh to judge the earth.
they have stricken me, `shalt thou say', and i was not hurt; they have beaten me, and i felt it not: when shall i awake? i will seek it yet again.
and the sons of keturah, abraham's concubine: she bare zimran, and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and ishbak, and shuah. and the sons of jokshan: sheba, and dedan.
for the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs;
speak unto the children of israel, and say unto them, the set feasts of jehovah, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my set feasts.
but, as jehovah liveth, who brought up and who led the seed of the house of israel out of the north country, and from all the countries whither i had driven them. and they shall dwell in their own land.
when our sons shall be as plants grown up in their youth, and our daughters as corner-stones hewn after the fashion of a palace;
and they dwelt from havilah unto shur that is before egypt, as thou goest toward assyria. he abode over against all his brethren.
and it came to pass in the month nisan, in the twentieth year of artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him, that i took up the wine, and gave it unto the king. now i had not been `beforetime' sad in his presence.
and some of their brethren, of the sons of the kohathites, were over the showbread, to prepare it every sabbath.
then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
even as it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long; we were accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
now therefore, behold, jehovah hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets; and jehovah hath spoken evil concerning thee.
and he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her: and immediately she rose up and ministered unto them.
and for the leprosy of a garment, and for a house,
all the day long is my dishonor before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me,
that they might set their hope in god, and not forget the works of god, but keep his commandments,
and the house which king solomon built for jehovah, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty `cubits', and the height thereof thirty cubits.
which in its own times he shall show, who is the blessed and only potentate, the king of kings, and lord of lords;
they took therefore two chariots with horses; and the king sent after the host of the syrians, saying, go and see.
and the lot came out for the children of joseph from the jordan at jericho, at the waters of jericho on the east, even the wilderness, going up from jericho through the hill-country to beth-el;
then said he unto me, the iniquity of the house of israel and judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of wrestling `of judgment': for they say, jehovah hath forsaken the land, and jehovah seeth not.
and he shall separate unto jehovah the days of his separation, and shall bring a he-lamb a year old for a trespass-offering; but the former days shall be void, because his separation was defiled.
and it came to pass after this, that benhadad king of syria gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged samaria.
and moses and aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of israel:
and i will be yet more vile than this, and will be base in mine own sight: but of the handmaids of whom thou hast spoken, of them shall i be had in honor.
jehovah upholdeth the meek: he bringeth the wicked down to the ground.
then said saul to his armorbearer, draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. but his armorbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. therefore saul took his sword, and fell upon it.
for the father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that i came forth from the father.
and jehovah have removed men far away, and the forsaken places be many in the midst of the land.
and if the bright spot stay in its place, and be not spread in the skin, but be dim; it is the rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is the scar of the burning.
and she caught him by his garment, saying, lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.
lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions.
then the men of judah gave a shout: and as the men of judah shouted, it came to pass, that god smote jeroboam and all israel before abijah and judah.
a lying tongue hateth those whom it hath wounded; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.
for such a high priest became us, holy, guileless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
for i am ready to fall, and my sorrow is continually before me.
then i came to them of the captivity at tel-abib, that dwelt by the river chebar, and to where they dwelt; and i sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.
and it passed along to azmon, and went out at the brook of egypt; and the goings out of the border were at the sea: this shall be your south border.
the children of besai, the children of meunim, the children of nephushesim,
and in praying use not vain repetitions, as the gentiles do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
and he shall make a firm covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease; and upon the wing of abominations `shall come' one that maketh desolate; and even unto the full end, and that determined, shall `wrath' be poured out upon the desolate.
and as `were' the days of noah, so shall be the coming of the son of man.
and absalom and all the men of israel said, the counsel of hushai the archite is better than the counsel of ahithophel. for jehovah had ordained to defeat the good counsel of ahithophel, to the intent that jehovah might bring evil upon absalom.
beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount zion, `on' the sides of the north, the city of the great king.
and david reigned over all israel; and he executed justice and righteousness unto all his people.
and abram moved his tent, and came and dwelt by the oaks of mamre, which are in hebron, and built there an altar unto jehovah.
ziph, and telem, and bealoth,
and no man putteth a piece of undressed cloth upon an old garment; for that which should fill it up taketh from the garment, and a worse rent is made.
but certain worthless fellows said, how shall this man save us? and they despised him, and brought him no present. but he held his peace.
and i will dwell among the children of israel, and will be their god.
and early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them.
calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man of my counsel from a far country; yea, i have spoken, i will also bring it to pass; i have purposed, i will also do it.
whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she should ask.
but where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding?
and i saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of jesus. and when i saw her, i wondered with a great wonder.
i was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, before the earth was.
for he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee.
jesus answered, are there not twelve hours in the day? if a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world.
but they cried out all together, saying, away with this man, and release unto us barabbas: --
and it came to pass, as she spake to joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, `or' to be with her.
so joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.
take the rod, and assemble the congregation, thou, and aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes, that it give forth its water; and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock; so thou shalt give the congregation and their cattle drink.
and their brethren, in their villages, were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them:
behold, the days come, saith jehovah, that i will raise unto david a righteous branch, and he shall reign as king and deal wisely, and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
notwithstanding in thy days i will not do it, for david thy father's sake: but i will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
by myself have i sworn, the word is gone forth from my mouth `in' righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.
that thou hast built unto thee a vaulted place, and hast made thee a lofty place in every street.
but to the rest say i, not the lord: if any brother hath an unbelieving wife, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not leave her.
o jehovah our god, all this store that we have prepared to build thee a house for thy holy name cometh of thy hand, and is all thine own.
see, i have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant.
they shall call the peoples unto the mountain; there shall they offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck the abundance of the seas, and the hidden treasures of the sand.
and when the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.
and i say unto him, my lord, thou knowest. and he said to me, these are they that come of the great tribulation, and they washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the lamb.
and moses and the elders of israel commanded the people, saying, keep all the commandment which i command you this day.
and the magicians of egypt did in like manner with their enchantments: and pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as jehovah had spoken.
as for you, let that abide in you which ye heard from the beginning. if that which ye heard from the beginning abide in you, ye also shall abide in the son, and in the father.
shall two walk together, except they have agreed?
all things are full of weariness; man cannot utter `it': the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
and we toil, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure;
and it shall come to pass that, like as i have watched over them to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow and to destroy and to afflict, so will i watch over them to build and to plant, saith jehovah.
and zacharias said unto the angel, whereby shall i know this? for i am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.
and they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison; and after many days shall they be visited.
therefore thus saith the lord jehovah, behold, i will stretch out my hand upon the philistines, and i will cut off the cherethites, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.
and he had a helmet of brass upon his head, and he was clad with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.
and be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, who trespassed against jehovah, the god of their fathers, so that he gave them up to desolation, as ye see.
and in the hill-country, shamir, and jattir, and socoh,
and jehovah said unto her, two nations are in thy womb, and two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels. and the one people shall be stronger than the other people. and the elder shall serve the younger.
whereunto i labor also, striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily.
and elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of jacob, unto whom the word of jehovah came, saying, israel shall be thy name.
and they put the ark of jehovah upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their tumors.
thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, `nor' any likeness `of anything' that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:
and david spake to the men that stood by him, saying, what shall be done to the man that killeth this philistine, and taketh away the reproach from israel? for who is this uncircumcised philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living god?
so he inquired of them the hour when he began to amend. they said therefore unto him, yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.
and it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith jehovah.
jehovah will smite thee with the boil of egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scurvy, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.
and it came to pass, when the angel of jehovah spake these words unto all the children of israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
they have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully: they gather themselves together against me.
i hate them that regard lying vanities; but i trust in jehovah.
for the earth is the lord's, and the fulness thereof.
and the old man said, peace be unto thee; howsoever let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden.
and ye shall tell my father of all my glory in egypt, and of all that ye have seen: and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.
so then let us follow after things which make for peace, and things whereby we may edify one another.
and i hated all my labor wherein i labored under the sun, seeing that i must leave it unto the man that shall be after me.
and he said, swear unto me: and he sware unto him. and israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.
as for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the appearance of torches: `the fire' went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.
and she put off from her the garments of her widowhood, and covered herself with her veil, and wrapped herself, and sat in the gate of enaim, which is by the way to timnah; for she saw that shelah was grown up, and she was not given unto him to wife.
and they said unto him, grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on `thy' left hand, in thy glory.
now therefore, o king, come down, according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shall be to deliver him up into the king's hand.
even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blemish before him in love:
then went he down, and dipped `himself' seven times in the jordan, according to the saying of the man of god; and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.
i will put in the wilderness the cedar, the acacia, and the myrtle, and the oil-tree; i will set in the desert the fir-tree, the pine, and the box-tree together:
and jacob was wroth, and chode with laban: and jacob answered and said to laban, what is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast hotly pursued after me?
for we are the circumcision, who worship by the spirit of god, and glory in christ jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh:
and they departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere.
damascus was thy merchant for the multitude of thy handiworks, by reason of the multitude of all kinds of riches, with the wine of helbon, and white wool.
it may be they will present their supplication before jehovah, and will return every one from his evil way; for great is the anger and the wrath that jehovah hath pronounced against this people.
and while they still disbelieved for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, have ye here anything to eat?
jehovah will root up the house of the proud; but he will establish the border of the widow.
and he said, blessed be thou of jehovah, my daughter: thou hast showed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.
for, as for thy waste and thy desolate places, and thy land that hath been destroyed, surely now shalt thou be too strait for the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.
the son of abishua, the son of phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the chief priest;
and he goeth up into the mountain, and calleth unto him whom he himself would; and they went unto him.
and he commanded them that all should sit down by companies upon the green grass.
wilt thou confide in him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather `the grain' of thy threshing-floor?
and the manna ceased on the morrow, after they had eaten of the produce of the land; neither had the children of israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of canaan that year.
and immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying god: and all the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto god.
the spirit of the lord jehovah is upon me; because jehovah hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening `of the prison' to them that are bound;
jehovah hath spoken concerning you, o remnant of judah, go ye not into egypt: know certainly that i have testified unto you this day.
and jonadab said unto the king, behold, the king's sons are come: as thy servant said, so it is.
then the earth shook and trembled, the foundations of heaven quaked and were shaken, because he was wroth.
and if `my head' exalt itself, thou huntest me as a lion; and again thou showest thyself marvellous upon me.
and samuel said unto all israel, behold, i have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.
unto thee, o jehovah, will i call: my rock, be not thou deaf unto me; lest, if thou be silent unto me, i become like them that go down into the pit.
and the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his father's nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
a glorious throne, `set' on high from the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.
do not i hate them, o jehovah, that hate thee? and am not i grieved with those that rise up against thee?
so joshua did as moses had said to him, and fought with amalek: and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.
then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the enchanters, and the sorcerers, and the chaldeans, to tell the king his dreams. so they came in and stood before the king.
and the children of israel arose, and went up to beth-el, and asked counsel of god; and they said, who shall go up for us first to battle against the children of benjamin? and jehovah said, judah `shall go up' first.
and the children of israel said unto jehovah, we have sinned: do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; only deliver us, we pray thee, this day.
and the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the host of pharaoh that went in after them into the sea; there remained not so much as one of them.
and in those days cometh john the baptist, preaching in the wilderness of judaea, saying,
oh that my vexation were but weighed, and all my calamity laid in the balances!
now these are the generations of perez: perez begat hezron,
and they called them, and charged them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of jesus.
but he answered and said, every plant which my heavenly father planted not, shall be rooted up.
and thou shalt make it a holy anointing oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer: it shall be a holy anointing oil.
yet the children of thy people say, the way of the lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.
and they stood in their place after their order, according to the law of moses the man of god: the priests sprinkled the blood `which they received' of the hand of the levites.
god bringeth them forth out of egypt; he hath as it were the strength of the wild-ox.
and joseph was the governor over the land; he it was that sold to all the people of the land. and joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves to him with their faces to the earth.
and at the return of the year king nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of jehovah, and made zedekiah his brother king over judah and jerusalem.
and thou shalt set the levites before aaron, and before his sons, and offer them for a wave-offering unto jehovah.
and as david returned from the slaughter of the philistine, abner took him, and brought him before saul with the head of the philistine in his hand.
and thou shalt behold the affliction of `my' habitation, in all the wealth which `god' shall give israel; and there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever.
and i will give over the egyptians into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the lord, jehovah of hosts.
even now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and he that voucheth for me is on high.
and in jerusalem dwelt of the children of judah, and of the children of benjamin, and of the children of ephraim and manasseh:
and he said, all these things have i observed from my youth up.
and bilhah conceived, and bare jacob a son.
terrors overtake him like waters; a tempest stealeth him away in the night.
the sixth lot came out for the children of naphtali, even for the children of naphtali according to their families.
who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the perverseness of evil;
all the souls that came with jacob into egypt, that came out of his loins, besides jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore and six;
he rescueth me from mine enemies; yea, thou liftest me up above them that rise up against me; thou deliverest me from the violent man.
`thou art' a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and flowing streams from lebanon.
and they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before jehovah, and returned, and came to their house to ramah: and elkanah knew hannah his wife; and jehovah remembered her.
put on the whole armor of god, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
do ye think to reprove words, seeing that the speeches of one that is desperate are as wind?
so naaman came with his horses and with his chariots, and stood at the door of the house of elisha.
then darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the archives, where the treasures were laid up in babylon.
hearken unto me, o jacob, and israel my called: i am he; i am the first, i also am the last.
they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
and laban gave zilpah his handmaid unto his daughter leah for a handmaid.
then three thousand men of judah went down to the cleft of the rock of etam, and said to samson, knowest thou not that the philistines are rulers over us? what then is this that thou hast done unto us? and he said unto them, as they did unto me, so have i done unto them.
the god of israel said, the rock of israel spake to me: one that ruleth over men righteously, that ruleth in the fear of god,
he shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of jerusalem.
and they that saw it declared unto them how it befell him that was possessed with demons, and concerning the swine.
they are gone up to bayith, and to dibon, to the high places, to weep: moab waileth over nebo, and over medeba; on all their heads is baldness, every beard is cut off.
zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in jerusalem: and his mother's name was hamutal the daughter of jeremiah of libnah.
and they shall come against thee with weapons, chariots, and wagons, and with a company of peoples; they shall set themselves against thee with buckler and shield and helmet round about; and i will commit the judgment unto them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.
i am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.
and ishpan, and eber, and eliel,
judge ye in yourselves: is it seemly that a woman pray unto god unveiled?
and the people, the men of israel, encouraged themselves, and set the battle again in array in the place where they set themselves in array the first day.
the lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of jehovah.
and it came to pass, when we came to the lodging-place, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.
and the king sent and called for shimei, and said unto him, build thee a house in jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither.
they that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head: they that would cut me off, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: that which i took not away i have to restore.
and jonathan smote the garrison of the philistines that was in geba: and the philistines heard of it. and saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, let the hebrews hear.
but all the israelites went down to the philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock;
and he came to him, and, lo, he was standing by his burnt-offering, and the princes of moab with him. and balak said unto him, what hath jehovah spoken?
and abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
and knowing their thoughts he said unto them, every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand:
ye shall fall by the sword; i will judge you in the border of israel; and ye shall know that i am jehovah.
and david longed, and said, oh that one would give me water to drink of the well of beth-lehem, which is by the gate!
so man lieth down and riseth not: till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be roused out of their sleep.
and it came to pass, when the sun arose, that god prepared a sultry east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of jonah, that he fainted, and requested for himself that he might die, and said, it is better for me to die than to live.
and moses did as jehovah commanded him; and he took joshua, and set him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
and he came down with them, and stood on a level place, and a great multitude of his disciples, and a great number of the people from all judaea and jerusalem, and the sea coast of tyre and sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases;
the measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
and as for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of judah dwelt in kiriath-arba and the towns thereof, and in dibon and the towns thereof, and in jekabzeel and the villages thereof,
and he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the broad place at the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying,
thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:
and through a window was i let down in a basket by the wall, and escaped his hands.
arise, o jehovah, into thy resting-place; thou, and the ark of thy strength.
and david laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of achish the king of gath.
it is a holy portion of the land; it shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, that come near to minister unto jehovah; and it shall be a place for their houses, and a holy place for the sanctuary.
then the king and all the people offered sacrifice before jehovah.
but many of them that heard the word believed; and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.
howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former manner.
neither be ye called masters: for one is your master, `even' the christ.
the word of jehovah which came to jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations.
and they came unto john, and said to him, rabbi, he that was with thee beyond the jordan, to whom thou hast borne witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him.
then amaziah the priest of beth-el sent to jeroboam king of israel, saying, amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.
who knoweth whether god will not turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?
the light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart; `and' good tidings make the bones fat.
to him that by understanding made the heavens; for his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever:
what, my son? and what, o son of my womb? and what, o son of my vows?
for the eighteenth to hanani, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
and the children of benjamin were numbered on that day out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, besides the inhabitants of gibeah, who were numbered seven hundred chosen men.
and when a convenient day was come, that herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, and the high captains, and the chief men of galilee;
and he appointed, according to the ordinance of david his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the levites to their offices, to praise, and to minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required; the doorkeepers also by their courses at every gate: for so had david the man of god commanded.
after this opened job his mouth, and cursed his day.
and they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, every small vessel, from the cups even to all the flagons.
and he read therein before the broad place that was before the water gate from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women, and of those that could understand; and the ears of all the people were `attentive' unto the book of the law.
and jesus perceiving `it' withdrew from thence: and many followed him; and he healed them all,
but as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderness by the way to the red sea.
and it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of egypt and his baker offended their lord the king of egypt.
i create the fruit of the lips: peace, peace, to him that is far off and to him that is near, saith jehovah; and i will heal him.
when therefore they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they behold jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the boat: and they were afraid.
and he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its vessels, and the laver and its base, to sanctify them.
likewise, ye younger, be subject unto the elder. yea, all of you gird yourselves with humility, to serve one another: for god resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.
those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel: ye have seen all the evil that i have brought upon jerusalem, and upon all the cities of judah; and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein,
so there went one on horseback to meet him, and said, thus saith the king, is it peace? and jehu said, what hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me. and the watchman told, saying, the messenger came to them, but he cometh not back.
when thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many peoples; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.
and moses chose able men out of all israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
and the sons of hebron: korah, and tappuah, and rekem, and shema.
but they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise;
and joseph came in unto them in the morning, and saw them, and, behold, they were sad.
come down, and sit in the dust, o virgin daughter of babylon; sit on the ground without a throne, o daughter of the chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.
that the king said unto nathan the prophet, see now, i dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of god dwelleth within curtains.
and it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, when i am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of god is buried; lay my bones beside his bones.
for whom the lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.
destroy, o lord, `and' divide their tongue; for i have seen violence and strife in the city.
thy holy cities are become a wilderness, zion is become a wilderness, jerusalem a desolation.
ye know `this', my beloved brethren. but let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath:
and he judged israel in the days of the philistines twenty years.
and judah went against the canaanites that dwelt in hebron (now the name of hebron beforetime was kiriath-arba); and they smote sheshai, and ahiman, and talmai.
then said daniel to the steward whom the prince of the eunuchs had appointed over daniel, hananiah, mishael, and azariah:
and the name of the star is called wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.
and he said, what then is to be done for her? and gehazi answered, verily she hath no son, and her husband is old.
as free, and not using your freedom for a cloak of wickedness, but as bondservants of god.
he will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will not slumber.
and i am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of zeruiah are too hard for me: jehovah reward the evil-doer according to his wickedness.
thou shalt surely let the dam go, but the young thou mayest take unto thyself; that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days.
who showest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them; the great, the mighty god, jehovah of hosts is his name;
but zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the names of his daughters: mahlah, and noah, hoglah, milcah, and tirzah.
but know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken through.
thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right before god.
this is the disciple that beareth witness of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his witness is true.
for evil-doers shall be cut off; but those that wait for jehovah, they shall inherit the land.
and they left their gods there; and david gave commandment, and they were burned with fire.
and when they could not come nigh unto him for the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed whereon the sick of the palsy lay.
the seventeenth to hezir, the eighteenth to happizzez,
when he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder;
and again, whom should i serve? `should i' not `serve' in the presence of his son? as i have served in thy father's presence, so will i be in thy presence.
and pharaoh said, behold, the people of the land are now many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.
and it came to pass, as i lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me, and fled out.
if ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in your prison-house; but go ye, carry grain for the famine of your houses:
whatsoever jehovah pleased, that hath he done, in heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps;
i have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and because no lie is of the truth.
that good thing which was committed unto `thee' guard through the holy spirit which dwelleth in us.
and `of' the sons of harim: eliezer, isshijah, malchijah, shemaiah, shimeon,
cursed be he that doeth the work of jehovah negligently; and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.
and she arose, and went away, and put off her veil from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
and it came to pass, when the days were well-nigh come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to jerusalem,
in their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulder, and carry it forth in the dark; thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the land: for i have set thee for a sign unto the house of israel.
and when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, send. they sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him not.
when my steps were washed with butter, and the rock poured me out streams of oil!
for this will i lament and wail; i will go stripped and naked; i will make a wailing like the jackals, and a lamentation like the ostriches.
and chelub the brother of shuhah begat mehir, who was the father of eshton.
and they asked him, saying, teacher, we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, and acceptest not the person `of any', but of a truth teachest the way of god:
the lofty looks of man shall be brought low, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
there is a lad here, who hath five barley loaves, and two fishes: but what are these among so many?
for her wounds are incurable; for it is come even unto judah; it reacheth unto the gate of my people, even to jerusalem.
`then' sent the king an answer unto rehum the chancellor, and to shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that dwell in samaria, and in the rest `of the country' beyond the river: peace, and so forth.
from on high hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them; he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.
and all his servants passed on beside him; and all the cherethites, and all the pelethites, and all the gittites, six hundred men that came after him from gath, passed on before the king.
whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof; and he that regardeth his master shall be honored.
that no man be moved by these afflictions; for yourselves know that hereunto we are appointed.
and the way of peace have they not known:
now therefore, our god, the great, the mighty, and the terrible god, who keepest covenant and lovingkindness, let not all the travail seem little before thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of assyria unto this day.
and the children of israel, even the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of zin in the first month: and the people abode in kadesh; and miriam died there, and was buried there.
then thou spakest in vision to thy saints, and saidst, i have laid help upon one that is mighty; i have exalted one chosen out of the people.
kings of the earth and all peoples; princes and all judges of the earth;
be thou exalted, o jehovah, in thy strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. psalm 22 for the chief musician; set to aijaleth hash-shahar. a psalm of david.
i am the bread of life.
they all builded the wall and they that bare burdens laded themselves; every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other held his weapon;
one generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.
`as' a roaring lion, and a ranging bear, `so is' a wicked ruler over a poor people.
and `his' brightness was as the light; he had rays `coming forth' from his hand; and there was the hiding of his power.
and let him that is on the housetop not go down, nor enter in, to take anything out his house:
then it shall be, in the day that he causeth his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make the son of the beloved the first-born before the son of the hated, who is the first-born:
elkanah, and isshiah, and azarel, and joezer, and jashobeam, the korahites,
but as for you, only keep yourselves from the devoted thing, lest when ye have devoted it, ye take of the devoted thing; so would ye make the camp of israel accursed, and trouble it.
and behold, they cried out, saying, what have we to do with thee, thou son of god? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?
and the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire. and as for the flesh, every one that is clean shall eat thereof:
and he spake unto the man clothed in linen, and said, go in between the whirling `wheels', even under the cherub, and fill both thy hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and scatter them over the city. and he went in in my sight.
while he was yet speaking with them, rachel came with her father's sheep. for she kept them.
wherefore should the nations say, where is their god? let the avenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed be known among the nations in our sight.
then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
the appetite of the laboring man laboreth for him; for his mouth urgeth him `thereto'.
speak ye unto all the congregation of israel, saying, in the tenth `day' of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a household:
the wind hath wrapped her up in its wings; and they shall be put to shame because of their sacrifices.
and the cities which the philistines had taken from israel were restored to israel, from ekron even unto gath; and the border thereof did israel deliver out of the hand of the philistines. and there was peace between israel and the amorites.
lamedh. quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall i observe the testimony of thy mouth.
stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast labored from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.
then david the king stood up upon his feet, and said, hear me, my brethren, and my people: as for me, it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of jehovah, and for the footstool of our god; and i had made ready for the building.
the times of ignorance therefore god overlooked; but now he commandeth men that they should all everywhere repent:
better is the poor that walketh in his integrity than he that is perverse in his lips and is a fool.
and there fell ten parts to manasseh, besides the land of gilead and bashan, which is beyond the jordan;
now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they turned in fear one toward another, and said unto baruch, we will surely tell the king of all these words.
for whether we live, we live unto the lord; or whether we die, we die unto the lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the lord's.
so saul died for his trespass which he committed against jehovah, because of the word of jehovah, which he kept not; and also for that he asked counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to inquire `thereby',
and ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the lord jehovah.
and all the men of his house, those born in the house, and those bought with money of a foreigner, were circumcised with him.
and thou shalt be profaned in thyself, in the sight of the nations; and thou shalt know that i am jehovah.
lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the muscles of his belly.
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, like as in the day of the trial in the wilderness,
and abram took sarai his wife, and lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in haran; and they went forth to go into the land of canaan; and into the land of canaan they came.
and let them deliver it into the hand of the workmen that have the oversight of the house of jehovah; and let them give it to the workmen that are in the house of jehovah, to repair the breaches of the house,
nevertheless saul spake not anything that day: for he thought, something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.
my foot standeth in an even place: in the congregations will i bless jehovah. psalm 27 `a psalm' of david.
and it came to pass, while there was war between the house of saul and the house of david, that abner made himself strong in the house of saul.
and unto man he said, behold, the fear of the lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.
and thou shalt love jehovah thy god with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.
for as in adam all die, so also in christ shall all be made alive.
this is the covenant that i will make with them after those days, saith the lord: i will put my laws on their heart, and upon their mind also will i write them; `then saith he,'
i say unto you, in that night there shall be two men on one bed; the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.
heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
but she is happier if she abide as she is, after my judgment: and i think that i also have the spirit of god.
and it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book, out of `that which is' before the priests the levites:
in the twilight, in the evening of the day, in the middle of the night and in the darkness.
joram his son, ahaziah his son, joash his son,
of the gershonites: ladan and shimei.
and he that overcometh, and he that keepeth my works unto the end, to him will i give authority over the nations:
therefore, as i live, saith the lord jehovah, i will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: since thou hast not hated blood, therefore blood shall pursue thee.
so then ye are no more strangers and sojourners, but ye are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of god,
with whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of justice, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding?
the lord hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary; he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces: they have made a noise in the house of jehovah, as in the day of a solemn assembly.
if this man were not from god, he could do nothing.
and joshua blessed him; and he gave hebron unto caleb the son of jephunneh for an inheritance.
and by the border of asher, from the east side even unto the west side, naphtali, one `portion'.
and brother shall deliver up brother to death, and the father his child: and children shall rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death.
jehovah is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeketh him.
for mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went forth throughout all the provinces; for the man mordecai waxed greater and greater.
now after this he built an outer wall to the city of david, on the west side of gihon, in the valley, even to the entrance at the fish gate; and he compassed ophel about `with it', and raised it up to a very great height: and he put valiant captains in all the fortified cities of judah.
and i prayed unto jehovah, and said, o lord jehovah, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, that thou hast redeemed through thy greatness, that thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a mighty hand.
that it may cause wrath to come up to take vengeance, i have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it should not be covered.
unless jehovah had been my help, my soul had soon dwelt in silence.
and he said to the king of israel, put thy hand upon the bow; and he put his hand `upon it'. and elisha laid his hands upon the king's hands.
and of it he shall offer one out of each oblation for a heave-offering unto jehovah; it shall be the priest's that sprinkleth the blood of the peace-offerings.
my dwelling is removed, and is carried away from me as a shepherd's tent: i have rolled up, like a weaver, my life; he will cut me off from the loom: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.
then zedekiah the son of chenaanah came near, and smote micaiah upon the cheek, and said, which way went the spirit of jehovah from me to speak unto thee?
what therefore god hath joined together, let not man put asunder.
shall not their cattle and their substance and all their beasts be ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.
and they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of judah, and out of the tribe of the children of simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of benjamin, these cities which are mentioned by name.
praise him with trumpet sound: praise him with psaltery and harp.
therefore will he give them up, until the time that she who travaileth hath brought forth: then the residue of his brethren shall return unto the children of israel.
unto the church of god which is at corinth, `even' them that are sanctified in christ jesus, called `to be' saints, with all that call upon the name of our lord jesus christ in every place, their `lord' and ours:
for those days shall be tribulation, such as there hath not been the like from the beginning of the creation which god created until now, and never shall be.
yea, at this my heart trembleth, and is moved out of its place.
and when the hour was come, he sat down, and the apostles with him.
and he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
simon the cananaean, and judas iscariot, who also betrayed him.
but `to go' shod with sandals: and, `said he', put not on two coats.
and it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of jehovah came unto me, saying,
and the waters prevailed, and increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
for i rejoiced greatly, when brethren came and bare witness unto thy truth, even as thou walkest in truth.
but the rest fled to aphek, into the city; and the wall fell upon twenty and seven thousand men that were left. and ben-hadad fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.
and i said unto them, ye are holy unto jehovah, and the vessels are holy; and the silver and the gold are a freewill-offering unto jehovah, the god of your fathers.
for the son of man also came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.
then solomon sat on the throne of jehovah as king instead of david his father, and prospered; and all israel obeyed him.
and he believed in jehovah; and he reckoned it to him for righteousness.
where no wise guidance is, the people falleth; but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
so they, when they were dismissed, came down to antioch; and having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle.
and thou shalt till the land for him, thou, and thy sons, and thy servants; and thou shalt bring in `the fruits', that thy master's son may have bread to eat: but mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat bread alway at my table. now ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
the dead praise not jehovah, neither any that go down into silence;
a man also or a woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with stones; their blood shall be upon them.
he hath walled me about, that i cannot go forth; he hath made my chain heavy.
beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward god;
and zichri, a mighty man of ephraim, slew maaseiah the king's son, and azrikam the ruler of the house, and elkanah that was next to the king.
what say i then? that a thing sacrificed to idols is anything, or that an idol is anything?
and the anger of jehovah was kindled against them; and he departed.
and when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, it may be that joseph will hate us, and will fully requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
the children of parosh, two thousand a hundred seventy and two.
and went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods that they knew not, and that he had not given unto them:
and they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the skilfully woven band of the ephod.
do ye not make distinctions among yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts?
and straightway he came to jesus, and said, hail, rabbi; and kissed him.
and he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a troop, when david slew them `of zobah': and they went to damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in damascus.
men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.
and they journeyed from elim, and encamped by the red sea.
three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knop and a flower: so for the six branches going out of the candlestick:
and love the chief place at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
notwithstanding, the sons of korah died not.
he is like a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.
and he said unto the woman, thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.
and judas, who betrayed him, answered and said, is it i, rabbi? he saith unto him, thou hast said.
and even now i know that, whatsoever thou shalt ask of god, god will give thee.
ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father; and ye shall keep my sabbaths: i am jehovah your god.
and the men of the city went out, and fought with joab: and there fell some of the people, even of the servants of david; and uriah the hittite died also.
and isaac departed thence, and encamped in the valley of gerar, and dwelt there.
and when he heard concerning jesus, he sent unto him elders of the jews, asking him that he would come and save his servant.
in those days i, daniel, was mourning three whole weeks.
there was nothing left that he devoured not; therefore his prosperity shall not endure.
and if he bring a lamb as his oblation for a sin-offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.
and when he met us at assos, we took him in, and came to mitylene.
and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf and the dancing: and moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.
and saul said unto his servants that stood about him, hear now, ye benjamites; will the son of jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, will he make you all captains of thousands and captains of hundreds,
and the priest shall look on him; and, behold, if the plague be turned into white, then the priest shall pronounce `him' clean `that hath' the plague: he is clean.
wherefore we henceforth know no man after the flesh: even though we have known christ after the flesh, yet now we know `him so' no more.
but come what may, `said he', i will run. and he said unto him, run. then ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and outran the cushite.
and the ass saw the angel of jehovah, and she lay down under balaam: and balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with his staff.
my heart is fixed, o god, my heart is fixed: i will sing, yea, i will sing praises.
and he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy-seat above upon the ark:
and othniel the son of kenaz, the brother of caleb, took it: and he gave him achsah his daughter to wife.
these are the families of levi: the family of the libnites, the family of the hebronites, the family of the mahlites, the family of the mushites, the family of the korahites. and kohath begat amram.
so joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up to ai: and joshua chose out thirty thousand men, the mighty men of valor, and sent them forth by night.
and there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and one said, rise, and measure the temple of god, and the altar, and them that worship therein.
wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the philistines.
but if ye shall turn away from following me, ye or your children, and not keep my commandments and my statutes which i have set before you, but shall go and serve other gods, and worship them;
and every beast that parteth the hoof, and hath the hoof cloven in two, `and' cheweth the cud, among the beasts, that may ye eat.
and i will make thee swear by jehovah, the god of heaven and the god of the earth, that thou wilt not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the canaanites, among whom i dwell.
and in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall; and, behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, and the appearance thereof be not deeper than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
thy shepherds slumber, o king of assyria; thy nobles are at rest; thy people are scattered upon the mountains, and there is none to gather them.
for this cause, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction through your faith:
and he ran unto eli, and said, here am i; for thou calledst me. and he said, i called not; lie down again. and he went and lay down.
woe to thee that destroyest, and thou wast not destroyed; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou hast ceased to destroy, thou shalt be destroyed; and when thou hast made an end of dealing treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
without are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one that loveth and maketh a lie.
but he led forth his own people like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
though i am like a rotten thing that consumeth, like a garment that is moth-eaten.
and pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not so much as one of the cattle of the israelites dead. but the heart of pharaoh was stubborn, and he did not let the people go.
therefore jehovah established the kingdom in his hand; and all judah brought to jehoshaphat tribute; and he had riches and honor in abundance.
and saul sought to smite david even to the wall with the spear; but he slipped away out of saul's presence, and he smote the spear into the wall: and david fled, and escaped that night.
but i will come unto you, when i shall have passed through macedonia; for i pass through macedonia;
and this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.
o death, where is thy victory? o death, where is thy sting?
it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger.
he was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world knew him not.
and let every wise-hearted man among you come, and make all that jehovah hath commanded:
and i also say unto thee, that thou art peter, and upon this rock i will build my church; and the gates of hades shall not prevail against it.
then nebuchadnezzar in `his' rage and fury commanded to bring shadrach, meshach, and abed-nego. then they brought these men before the king.
behold, it is the litter of solomon; threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty men of israel.
and omri did that which was evil in the sight of jehovah, and dealt wickedly above all that were before him.
and keilah, and achzib, and mareshah; nine cities with their villages.
but if his means suffice not for two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, then he shall bring his oblation for that wherein he hath sinned, the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin-offering: he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon; for it is a sin-offering.
for they all did cast in of their superfluity; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, `even' all her living.
and the children of dan went their way: and when micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.
and thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is outmost in the second coupling.
who being the effulgence of his glory, and the very image of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had made purification of sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high;
and now, behold, i loose thee this day from the chains which are upon thy hand. if it seem good unto thee to come with me into babylon, come, and i will look well unto thee; but if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is before thee; whither it seemeth good and right unto thee to go, thither go.
but if thou wilt go, do `valiantly', be strong for the battle: god will cast thee down before the enemy; for god hath power to help, and to cast down.
and he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to hebron, so he did to debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to libnah, and to the king thereof.
and i persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.
even those men that did bring up an evil report of the land, died by the plague before jehovah.
as thou knowest not what is the way of the wind, `nor' how the bones `do grow' in the womb of her that is with child; even so thou knowest not the work of god who doeth all.
and thou hast declared this day how that thou hast dealt well with me, forasmuch as when jehovah had delivered me up into thy hand, thou killedst me not.
for they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they tell of the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded.
jehovah is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation.
and the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and soul: and not one `of them' said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.
but there came a man of god to him, saying, o king, let not the army of israel go with thee; for jehovah is not with israel, `to wit', with all the children of ephraim.
philip findeth nathanael, and saith unto him, we have found him, of whom moses in the law, and the prophets, wrote, jesus of nazareth, the son of joseph.
for he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken away even that which he hath.
but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of jehovah hath spoken it.
until thy brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him. then i will send, and fetch thee from thence. why should i be bereaved of you both in one day?
i know his wrath, saith jehovah, that it is nought; his boastings have wrought nothing.
the ransom of a man's life is his riches; but the poor heareth no threatening.
jesus answered, sayest thou this of thyself, or did others tell it thee concerning me?
who serve `that which is' a copy and shadow of the heavenly things, even as moses is warned `of god' when he is about to make the tabernacle: for, see, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern that was showed thee in the mount.
shall a man make unto himself gods, which yet are no gods?
and i looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, be not ye afraid of them: remember the lord, who is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.
and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother esau's hands. so he blessed him.
bless them that curse you, pray for them that despitefully use you.
thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter.
behold, the lord jehovah will come as a mighty one, and his arm will rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense before him.
and the ark of jehovah was in the country of the philistines seven months.
because jehovah was not able to bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.
write ye also to the jews, as it pleaseth you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring; for the writing which is written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse.
fulfil the week of this one, and we will give thee the other also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
and they began to beseech him to depart from their borders.
when israel was a child, then i loved him, and called my son out of egypt.
and the king said, whosoever saith aught unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.
even as it is written, behold, i lay in zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence: and he that believeth on him shall not be put to shame.
and peter had followed him afar off, even within, into the court of the high priest; and he was sitting with the officers, and warming himself in the light `of the fire'.
thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth; thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
the rings, and the nose-jewels;
philip saith unto him, lord, show us the father, and it sufficeth us.
and hamor the father of shechem went out unto jacob to commune with him.
and david took all the flocks and the herds, `which' they drove before those `other' cattle, and said, this is david's spoil.
and encamp ye without the camp seven days: whosoever hath killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, ye and your captives.
but ananias answered, lord, i have heard from many of this man, how much evil he did to thy saints at jerusalem:
behold, this is the third time i am ready to come to you; and i will not be a burden to you: for i seek not yours, but you: for the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, he knoweth not how.
and if the righteous is scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?
and it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on eliab, and said, surely jehovah's anointed is before him.
thou wilt show me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; in thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. psalm 17 a prayer of david.
now the spirit of jehovah departed from saul, and an evil spirit from jehovah troubled him.
and at the door of the tent of meeting shall ye abide day and night seven days, and keep the charge of jehovah, that ye die not: for so i am commanded.
and they lodged round about the house of god, because the charge `thereof' was upon them; and to them pertained the opening thereof morning by morning.
and during supper, the devil having already put into the heart of judas iscariot, simon's `son', to betray him,
the one `do it' of love, knowing that i am set for the defence of the gospel;
for when god made promise to abraham, since he could swear by none greater, he sware by himself,
and i will strengthen the house of judah, and i will save the house of joseph, and i will bring them back; for i have mercy upon them; and they shall be as though i had not cast them off: for i am jehovah their god, and i will hear them.
and beseecheth him much, saying, my little daughter is at the point of death: `i pray thee', that thou come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be made whole, and live.
who by the power of god are guarded through faith unto a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
and david and his men went to keilah, and fought with the philistines, and brought away their cattle, and slew them with a great slaughter. so david save the inhabitants of keilah.
`what' then if ye should behold the son of man ascending where he was before?
thus saith jehovah of hosts, consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for the skilful women, that they may come:
therefore thus saith jehovah concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and i sent them not, yet they say, sword and famine shall not be in this land: by sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed.
thou shalt fear jehovah thy god; him shalt thou serve; and to him shalt thou cleave, and by his name shalt thou swear.
and the smoke of their torment goeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day and night, they that worship the beast and his image, and whoso receiveth the mark of his name.
the singers: the children of asaph, a hundred forty and eight.
and it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud; and all the people that were in the camp trembled.
and it came to pass, when abiathar the son of ahimelech fled to david to keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.
but he answered and said, verily i say unto you, i know you not.
to confirm these days of purim in their appointed times, according as mordecai the jew and esther the queen had enjoined them, and as they had ordained for themselves and for their seed, in the matter of the fastings and their cry.
and i will make the rivers dry, and will sell the land into the hand of evil men; and i will make the land desolate, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: i, jehovah, have spoken it.
then said he unto me, son of man, dig now in the wall: and when i had digged in the wall, behold, a door.
and i will strengthen them in jehovah; and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith jehovah.
and they knew not that joseph understood them; for there was an interpreter between them.
but paul choose silas, and went forth, being commended by the brethren to the grace of the lord.
jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and gracious in all his works.
and straightway the king sent forth a soldier of his guard, and commanded to bring his head: and he went and beheaded him in the prison,
are we not accounted by him as foreigners? for he hath sold us, and hath also quite devoured our money.
they sought again to take him: and he went forth out of their hand.
seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the birds of the heavens.
and as touching the matter which thou and i have spoken of, behold, jehovah is between thee and me for ever.
and ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting seven days, until the days of your consecration be fulfilled: for he shall consecrate you seven days.
of the tribe of issachar, igal the son of joseph.
when thou goest forth to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, `and' a people more than thou, thou shalt not be afraid of them; for jehovah thy god is with thee, who brought thee up out of the land of egypt.
but his lord answered and said unto him, thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that i reap where i sowed not, and gather where i did not scatter;
i know ephraim, and israel is not hid from me; for now, o ephraim, thou hast played the harlot, israel is defiled.
whatsoever ye do, work heartily, as unto the lord, and not unto men;
and if thou refuse to let them go, behold, i will smite all thy borders with frogs:
if i do not the works of my father, believe me not.
`to be' sober-minded, chaste, workers at home, kind, being in subjection to their own husbands, that the word of god be not blasphemed:
for we are bondmen; yet our god hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended lovingkindness unto us in the sight of the kings of persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our god, and to repair the ruins thereof, and to give us a wall in judah and in jerusalem.
and behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, this man blasphemeth.
for if the inheritance is of the law, it is no more of promise: but god hath granted it to abraham by promise.
that this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood without cause, or that my lord hath avenged himself. and when jehovah shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thy handmaid.
and when the day came that elkanah sacrificed, he gave to peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:
thou shalt die the death of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for i have spoken it, saith the lord jehovah.
but i permit not a woman to teach, nor to have dominion over a man, but to be in quietness.
and he made ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths; and every laver was four cubits; and upon very one of the ten bases one laver.
and from jesus christ, `who is' the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. unto him that loveth us, and loosed us from our sins by his blood;
such as sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron,
now from the time that amaziah did turn away from following jehovah they made a conspiracy against him in jerusalem; and he fled to lachish: but they sent after him to lachish, and slew him there.
in your patience ye shall win your souls.
then the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over, and came to joshua the son of nun; and they told him all that had befallen them.
and afterward moses and aaron came, and said unto pharaoh, thus saith jehovah, the god of israel, let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
and jehoiachin the king of judah went out to the king of babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officers: and the king of babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.
perceive ye not, that whatsoever goeth into the mouth passeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?
therefore thus saith the lord, jehovah of hosts, o my people that dwellest in zion, be not afraid of the assyrian, though he smite thee with the rod, and lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of egypt.
and balak's anger was kindled against balaam, and he smote his hands together; and balak said unto balaam, i called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times.
therefore, behold, i will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations; and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.
that which is, is far off and exceeding deep; who can find it out?
and i heard the altar saying, yea, o lord god, the almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.
and ananias hearing these words fell down and gave up the ghost: and great fear came upon all that heard it.
ye hypocrites, well did isaiah prophesy of you, saying,
`i had fainted', unless i had believed to see the goodness of jehovah in the land of the living.
whereby, when ye read, ye can perceive my understanding in the mystery of christ;
the sons of rachel: joseph and benjamin;
but if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.
and when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely:
moreover as for me, far be it from me that i should sin against jehovah in ceasing to pray for you: but i will instruct you in the good and the right way.
but woe unto you pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and every herb, and pass over justice and the love of god: but these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
and they said unto him, sit down now, and read it in our ears. so baruch read it in their ears.
then he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.
and when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, for that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of israel.
now a certain jew named apollos, an alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to ephesus; and he was mighty in the scriptures.
who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the mind?
the servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, lord, have patience with me, and i will pay thee all.
in that day the lord will take away the beauty of their anklets, and the cauls, and the crescents;
and every meal-offering of the priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.
even that it would please god to crush me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!
in the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that strangers carried away his substance, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.
and crying out with a loud voice, he saith, what have i to do with thee, jesus, thou son of the most high god? i adjure thee by god, torment me not.
now he spake of judas `the son' of simon iscariot, for he it was that should betray him, `being' one of the twelve.
for unto this end was the gospel preached even to the dead, that they might be judged indeed according to men in the flesh, but live according to god in the spirit.
and he sent messengers unto balaam the son of beor, to pethor, which is by the river, to the land of the children of his people, to call him, saying, behold, there is a people come out from egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me.
and when i arrive, whomsoever ye shall approve, them will i send with letters to carry your bounty unto jerusalem:
and also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy good in all his labor, is the gift of god.
in like manner also there are good works that are evident; and such as are otherwise cannot be hid.
and hadad died. and the chiefs of edom were: chief timna, chief aliah, chief jetheth,
ye therefore, beloved, knowing `these things' beforehand, beware lest, being carried away with the error of the wicked, ye fall from your own stedfastness.
and when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him, blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of god.
trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches increase, set not your heart `thereon'.
wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, my father, thou art the guide of my youth?
and you will i scatter among the nations, and i will draw out the sword after you: and your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be a waste.
for our shield belongeth unto jehovah; and our king to the holy one of israel.
those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.
but if the cloud was not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.
and david said, solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be builded for jehovah must be exceeding magnificent, of fame and of glory throughout all countries: i will therefore make preparation for it. so david prepared abundantly before his death.
in diligence not slothful; fervent in spirit; serving the lord;
if thou hast sinned, what effectest thou against him? and if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?
these see the works of jehovah, and his wonders in the deep.
and he did very abominably in following idols, according to all that the amorites did, whom jehovah cast out before the children of israel.)
the grace of the lord jesus christ, and the love of god, and the communion of the holy spirit, be with you all.
but jehovah sitteth `as king' for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment;
and after these days we took up our baggage and went up to jerusalem.
for their calamity shall rise suddenly; and the destruction from them both, who knoweth it?
and calling to him each one of his lord's debtors, he said to the first, how much owest thou unto my lord?
the sons of eliphaz: teman, and omar, zephi, and gatam, kenaz, and timna, and amalek.
i will set no base thing before mine eyes: i hate the work of them that turn aside; it shall not cleave unto me.
and iron, and migdal-el, horem, and beth-anath, and beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
if the anointed priest shall sin so as to bring guilt on the people, then let him offer for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto jehovah for a sin-offering.
but as for you, your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness.
and all king solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of lebanon were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was nothing accounted of in the days of solomon.
thou shalt not wrest the justice `due' to thy poor in his cause.
and they began to question among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.
and jehovah came down in the cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, but they did so no more.
and the damsel's father shall say unto the elders, i gave my daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her;
and by some, that elijah had appeared; and by others, that one of the old prophets was risen again.
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting,
wherefore my wrath and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of judah and in the streets of jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as it is this day.
and they said one to another, behold, this dreamer cometh.
if any man destroyeth the temple of god, him shall god destroy; for the temple of god is holy, and such are ye.
and what concord hath christ with belial? or what portion hath a believer with an unbeliever?
and i will strengthen the arms of the king of babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but i will break the arms of pharaoh, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.
and i said, my strength is perished, and mine expectation from jehovah.
and thou shalt make holy garments for aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.
and the priest shall offer the sin-offering, and make atonement for him that is to be cleansed because of his uncleanness: and afterward he shall kill the burnt-offering;
and the glede, and the falcon, and the kite after its kind,
the peoples have heard, they tremble: pangs have taken hold on the inhabitants of philistia.
why drawest thou back thy hand, even thy right hand? `pluck it' out of thy bosom `and' consume `them'.
and jesus said unto him, go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole. and straightway he received his sight, and followed him in the way.
and they found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and quiet, and peaceable; for they that dwelt there aforetime were of ham.
my spirit is consumed, my days are extinct, the grave is `ready' for me.
behold, he smote the rock, so that waters gushed out, and streams overflowed; can he give bread also? will he provide flesh for his people?
for to the man that pleaseth him `god' giveth wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that pleaseth god. this also is vanity and a striving after wind.
and the sons of bela were ard and naaman: `of ard', the family of the ardites; of naaman, the family of the naamites.
ascribe unto jehovah the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come into his courts.
and the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look; and, behold, if the plague be spread in the walls of the house;
and he offered the tribute unto eglon king of moab: now eglon was a very fat man.
in the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in its appointed season: according to all the statutes of it, and according to all the ordinances thereof, shall ye keep it.
and he called the name of that place beth-el. but the name of the city was luz at the first.
and edom shall be a possession, seir also shall be a possession, `who were' his enemies; while israel doeth valiantly.
this is the law of the beast, and of the bird, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth;
grace be with you all. amen.
nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he took warning; and thou hast delivered thy soul.
let his own eyes see his destruction, and let him drink of the wrath of the almighty.
thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, so that no prayer can pass through.
and there he found a certain man named aeneas, who had kept his bed eight years; for he was palsied.
the children of judah that bare shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, armed for war.
trust in him at all times, ye people; pour out your heart before him: god is a refuge for us. selah
and they said unto her, thou art mad. but she confidently affirmed that it was even so. and they said, it is his angel.
moreover manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled jerusalem from one end to another; besides his sin wherewith he made judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of jehovah.
and refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them, but hardened their neck, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage. but thou art a god ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in lovingkindness, and forsookest them not.
and unto the families of the children of merari, the rest of the levites, out of the tribe of zebulun, jokneam with its suburbs, and kartah with its suburbs,
if ye have tasted that the lord is gracious:
i will destine you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter; because when i called, ye did not answer; when i spake, ye did not hear; but ye did that which was evil in mine eyes, and chose that wherein i delighted not.
of the children of joseph: of the tribe of the children of manasseh a prince, hanniel the son of ephod.
yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to set the goads.
for thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel: i have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may served nebuchadnezzar king of babylon; and they shall serve him: and i have given him the beasts of the field also.
and for the other side shall be hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
an end is come, the end is come; it awaketh against thee; behold, it cometh.
and his concubine played the harlot against him, and went away from him unto her father's house to beth-lehem-judah, and was there the space of four months.
to crush under foot all the prisoners of the earth,
and mizpah, for he said, jehovah watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.
all things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth and to him that sacrificeth not; as is the good, so is the sinner; `and' he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.
out of the spoil won in battles did they dedicate to repair the house of jehovah.
jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in jerusalem: and his mother's name was zebidah the daughter of pedaiah of rumah.
wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the palsied knees;
i will open my mouth in a parable; i will utter dark sayings of old,
give us day by day our daily bread.
and ye answered me, and said, the thing which thou hast spoken is good `for us' to do.
thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.
and david said, whosoever smiteth the jebusites first shall be chief and captain. and joab the son of zeruiah went up first, and was made chief.
speak unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when either man or woman shall make a special vow, the vow of a nazirite, to separate himself unto jehovah,
and they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be upon the skilfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
then there went certain persons, and told david how the men were served. and he sent to meet them; for the men were greatly ashamed. and the king said, tarry at jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.
behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some `other' place: and it will come to pass, when some of them are fallen at the first, that whosoever heareth it will say, there is a slaughter among the people that follow absalom.
but i call god for a witness upon my soul, that to spare you i forbare to come unto corinth.
is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in your ceiled houses, while this house lieth waste?
to enrol himself with mary, who was betrothed to him, being great with child.
neither will i let thee hear any more the shame of the nations, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the peoples any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nation to stumble any more, saith the lord jehovah.
then the princes said unto the king, let this man, we pray thee, be put to death; forasmuch as he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.
because they rejected mine ordinances, and walked not in my statutes, and profaned my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.
and the child grew, and waxed strong, filled with wisdom: and the grace of god was upon him.
and god saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. and there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
and they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come unto gaza, and left no sustenance in israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.
when ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to trample my courts?
abram dwelt in the land of canaan, and lot dwelt in the cities of the plain, and moved his tent as far as sodom.
thy teeth are like a flock `of ewes' that are `newly' shorn, which are come up from the washing, whereof every one hath twins, and none is bereaved among them.
and manasseh seduced judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem, so that they did evil more than did the nations whom jehovah destroyed before the children of israel.
therefore the lord himself will give you a sign: behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name immanuel.
and i asked her, and said, whose daughter art thou? and she said, the daughter of bethuel, nahor's son, whom milcah bare unto him. and i put the ring upon her nose, and the bracelets upon her hands.
and this is the message which we have heard from him and announce unto you, that god is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
that they should seek god, if haply they might feel after him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us:
that your glorying may abound in christ jesus in me through my presence with you again.
damascus is waxed feeble, she turneth herself to flee, and trembling hath seized on her: anguish and sorrows have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.
the thought of foolishness is sin; and the scoffer is an abomination to men.
and over the herds that fed in sharon was shitrai the sharonite: and over the herds that were in the valleys was shaphat the son of adlai:
because that for the sake of the name they went forth, taking nothing of the gentiles.
for that is his only covering, it is his garment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that i will hear; for i am gracious.
only that the generations of the children of israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as beforetime knew nothing thereof:
which of these three, thinkest thou, proved neighbor unto him that fell among the robbers?
and there was war again: and david went out, and fought with the philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled before him.
and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat heard of it (for he was yet in egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of king solomon, and jeroboam dwelt in egypt,
for as to the life of all flesh, the blood thereof is `all one' with the life thereof: therefore i said unto the children of israel, ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh; for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.
but all the congregation bade stone them with stones. and the glory of jehovah appeared in the tent of meeting unto all the children of israel.
in that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, holy unto jehovah; and the pots in jehovah's house shall be like the bowls before the altar.
for their heart studieth oppression, and their lips talk of mischief.
and the men of the city said unto elisha, behold, we pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is bad, and the land miscarrieth.
whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
then call thou, and i will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me.
for, behold, the day cometh, it burneth as a furnace; and all the proud, and all that work wickedness, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith jehovah of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.
so david and abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, saul lay sleeping within the place of the wagons, with his spear stuck in the ground at his head; and abner and the people lay round about him.
and the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood by the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men girt with weapons of war.
and afterward joshua smote them, and put them to death, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
and they asked baruch, saying, tell us now, how didst thou write all these words at his mouth?
and, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed, and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river.
brethren, it was needful that the scripture should be fulfilled, which the holy spirit spake before by the mouth of david concerning judas, who was guide to them that took jesus.
go up into gilead, and take balm, o virgin daughter of egypt: in vain dost thou use many medicines; there is no healing for thee.
the fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;
the king of makkedah, one; the king of bethel, one;
even all the nations shall say, wherefore hath jehovah done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger?
and i will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith jehovah; and i will kindle a fire in her forest, and it shall devour all that is round about her.
then zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and joshua the son of jehozadak, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of jehovah their god, and the words of haggai the prophet, as jehovah their god had sent him; and the people did fear before jehovah.
and as he was now drawing nigh, `even' at the descent of the mount of olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise god with a loud voice for all the mighty works which they had seen;
and it came to pass, when the philistine arose, and came and drew nigh to meet david, that david hastened, and ran toward the army to meet the philistine.
but the people said, thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us: but thou art worth ten thousand of us; therefore now it is better that thou be ready to succor us out of the city.
and jehovah said unto joshua, this day have i rolled away the reproach of egypt from off you. wherefore the name of that place was called gilgal, unto this day.
besides the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, ye shall offer them (they shall be unto you without blemish), and their drink-offerings.
and the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the torches in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands wherewith to blow; and they cried, the sword of jehovah and of gideon.
and his father-in-law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there.
but he walked in the ways of the kings of israel, and made also molten images for the baalim.
and he made the staves of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold.
then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath his friend, and phicol the captain of his host.
and babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the chaldeans' pride, shall be as when god overthrew sodom and gomorrah.
but if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that jehovah hath showed me:
and showedst signs and wonders upon pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land; for thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them, and didst get thee a name, as it is this day.
the earth quaketh before them; the heavens tremble; the sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining.
but there were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,
but the house of israel rebelled against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they rejected mine ordinances, which if a man keep, he shall live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly profaned. then i said i would pour out my wrath upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.
send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of zion;
the children of shephatiah, the children of hattil, the children of pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of ami.
now we, brethren, as isaac was, are children of promise.
as the sparrow in her wandering, as the swallow in her flying, so the curse that is causeless alighteth not.
the book of the generation of jesus christ, the son of david, the son of abraham.
finally, be strong in the lord, and in the strength of his might.
and moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath magnified himself against jehovah.
the sun to rule by day; for his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever;
and when they drew nigh unto jerusalem, and came unto bethphage, unto the mount of olives, then jesus sent two disciples,
and the name of the other was eliezer; for `he said', the god of my father was my help, and delivered me from the sword of pharaoh.
and after some days paul said unto barnabas, let us return now and visit the brethren in every city wherein we proclaimed the word of the lord, `and see' how they fare.
then he saith, i will return into my house whence i came out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.
and the daughter of pharaoh came down to bathe at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river-side; and she saw the ark among the flags, and sent her handmaid to fetch it.
ben-geber, in ramoth-gilead (to him `pertained' the towns of jair the son of manasseh, which are in gilead; `even' to him `pertained' the region of argob, which is in bashan, threescore great cities with walls and brazen bars);
thus edom refused to give israel passage through his border: wherefore israel turned away from him.
and as they went on the way, they came unto a certain water; and the eunuch saith, behold, `here is' water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?
but he spake of the temple of his body.
these were thy traffickers in choice wares, in wrappings of blue and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.
and david dwelt with achish at gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even david with his two wives, ahinoam the jezreelitess, and abigail the carmelitess, nabal's wife.
and the spirit of jehovah came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid; and he had nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had done.
and of the children of israel's half, thou shalt take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of the oxen, of the asses, and of the flocks, `even' of all the cattle, and give them unto the levites, that keep the charge of the tabernacle of jehovah.
and they brought forth the pillars that were in the house of baal, and burned them.
this is the thing that ye shall do: a third part of you, that come in on the sabbath, of the priests and of the levites, shall be porters of the thresholds;
for no prophecy ever came by the will of man: but men spake from god, being moved by the holy spirit.
and the brethren immediately sent away paul and silas by night unto beroea: who when they were come thither went into the synagogue of the jews.
i have set jehovah always before me: because he is at my right hand, i shall not be moved.
and jehovah said unto joshua, fear them not: for i have delivered them into thy hands; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.
oh that the salvation of israel were come out of zion! when god bringeth back the captivity of his people, then shall jacob rejoice, `and' israel shall be glad. psalm 54 for the chief musician; on stringed instruments. maschil of david; when the ziphites came and said to saul, doth not david hide himself with us?
which things contain an allegory: for these `women' are two covenants; one from mount sinai, bearing children unto bondage, which is hagar.
and they brought horses for solomon out of egypt, and out of all lands.
because it is written, ye shall be holy; for i am holy.
from tappuah the border went along westward to the brook of kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of ephraim according to their families;
are they hebrews? so am i. are they israelites? so am i. are they the seed of abraham? so am i.
of zebulun, ishmaiah the son of obadiah: of naphtali, jeremoth the son of azriel:
from heaven fought the stars, from their courses they fought against sisera.
and hadarezer sent, and brought out the syrians that were beyond the river: and they came to helam, with shobach the captain of the host of hadarezer at their head.
faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that christ jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom i am chief:
he shall build me a house, and i will establish his throne for ever.
now the rest of the acts of rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
verily, verily, i say unto you, he that receiveth whomsoever i send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.
and say, if we had been in the days of our fathers, we should not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
i acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity did i not hide: i said, i will confess my transgressions unto jehovah; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. selah
then said they, come, and let us devise devices against jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.
and he said unto him, what is written in the law? how readest thou?
so all the generations from abraham unto david are fourteen generations; and from david unto the carrying away to babylon fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to babylon unto the christ fourteen generations.
of the half -`tribe' of manasseh in gilead, iddo the son of zechariah: of benjamin, jaasiel the son of abner:
ask thy young men, and they will tell thee: wherefore let the young men find favor in thine eyes; for we come in a good day: give, i pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thy hand, unto thy servants, and to thy son david.
and he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil:
but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie fallow; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beast of the field shall eat. in like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, `and' with thy oliveyard.
who is he that condemneth? it is christ jesus that died, yea rather, that was raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of god, who also maketh intercession for us.
and over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was ezri the son of chelub:
and thou shalt not bring an abomination into thy house, and become a devoted thing like unto it: thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a devoted thing.
and all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king david, submitted themselves unto solomon the king.
john answered, saying unto them all, i indeed baptize you with water; but there cometh he that is mightier than i, the latchet of whose shoes i am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you in the holy spirit and `in' fire:
and the stones shall be according to the names of the children of israel, twelve, according to their names; like the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name, they shall be for the twelve tribes.
and he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto jehovah, with the basket of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof.
and they shall bring all your brethren out of all the nations for an oblation unto jehovah, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon dromedaries, to my holy mountain jerusalem, saith jehovah, as the children of israel bring their oblation in a clean vessel into the house of jehovah.
have i to-day begun to inquire of god for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute anything unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father; for thy servant knoweth nothing of all this, less or more.
ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.
now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new tomb wherein was never man yet laid.
for the people shall dwell in zion at jerusalem; thou shalt weep no more; he will surely be gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear, he will answer thee.
and the children of israel gave by lot unto the levites these cities with their suburbs, as jehovah commanded by moses.
the sinners in zion are afraid; trembling hath seized the godless ones: who among us can dwell with the devouring fire? who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?
thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.
passing through the valley of weeping they make it a place of springs; yea, the early rain covereth it with blessings.
they made a calf in horeb, and worshipped a molten image.
now therefore deliver up the men, the base fellows, that are in gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from israel. but benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of israel.
now they that died by the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides them that died about the matter of korah.
and whom he foreordained, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
and of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place, and made the holy garments for aaron; as jehovah commanded moses.
and they with whom `precious' stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of jehovah, under the hand of jehiel the gershonite.
and he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold was gold of parvaim.
and judah gathered themselves together, to seek `help' of jehovah: even out of all the cities of judah they came to seek jehovah.
and the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and mastered both of them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
two and twenty years old was ahaziah when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in jerusalem. and his mother's name was athaliah the daughter of omri king of israel.
and the fear of god was on all the kingdoms of the countries, when they heard that jehovah fought against the enemies of israel.
and the sons of elioenai: hodaviah, and eliashib, and pelaiah, and akkub, and johanan, and delaiah, and anani, seven.
and gideon saw that he was the angel of jehovah; and gideon said, alas, o lord jehovah! forasmuch as i have seen the angel of jehovah face to face.
ashkelon shall see it, and fear; gaza also, and shall be sore pained; and ekron, for her expectation shall be put to shame; and the king shall perish from gaza, and ashkelon shall not be inhabited.
and they said unto him, the disciples of john fast often, and make supplications; likewise also the `disciples' of the pharisees; but thine eat and drink.
and he said, blessed be jehovah, the god of my master abraham, who hath not forsaken his lovingkindness and his truth toward my master. as for me, jehovah hath led me in the way to the house of my master's brethren.
when thou walkest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall watch over thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.
and in this `place' again, they shall not enter into my rest.
and bezalel and oholiab shall work, and every wise-hearted man, in whom jehovah hath put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all the work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that jehovah hath commanded.
and solomon the son of david was strengthened in his kingdom, and jehovah his god was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.
neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, and make us to hear it, that we may do it?
he that believeth on him is not judged: he that believeth not hath been judged already, because he hath not believed on the name of the only begotten son of god.
for by wise guidance thou shalt make thy war; and in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
lift up your heads, o ye gates; yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors: and the king of glory will come in.
and the sons of gad dwelt over against them, in the land of bashan unto salecah:
ahiam the son of sacar the hararite, eliphal the son of ur,
the princes refrained from talking, and laid their hand on their mouth;
but if in his eyes the scall be at a stay, and black hair be grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
but jesus turning unto them said, daughters of jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.
these are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of merari, whom moses and aaron numbered according to the commandment of jehovah by moses.
save that the holy spirit testifieth unto me in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me.
and he said unto them, follow after me; for jehovah hath delivered your enemies the moabites into your hand. and they went down after him, and took the fords of the jordan against the moabites, and suffered not a man to pass over.
therefore jehovah was very angry with israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of judah only.
then all the men of judah and benjamin gathered themselves together unto jerusalem within the three days; it was the ninth month, on the twentieth `day' of the month: and all the people sat in the broad place before the house of god, trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain.
now elisha had spoken unto the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying, arise, and go thou and thy household, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for jehovah hath called for a famine; and it shall also come upon the land seven years.
and they slew the bullock, and brought the child to eli.
thy tacklings are loosed; they could not strengthen the foot of their mast, they could not spread the sail: then was the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame took the prey.
know therefore that jehovah thy god, he is god, the faithful god, who keepeth covenant and lovingkindness with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations,
and one hath committed abomination with his neighbor's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.
then the king of israel called an officer, and said, fetch quickly micaiah the son of imlah.
they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits' end.
take the millstones, and grind meal; remove thy veil, strip off the train, uncover the leg, pass through the rivers.
that their hearts may be comforted, they being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, that they may know the mystery of god, `even' christ,
being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malignity; whisperers,
awake, awake, deborah; awake, awake, utter a song: arise, barak, and lead away thy captives, thou son of abinoam.
and jehovah of hosts revealed himself in mine ears, surely this iniquity shall not be forgiven you till ye die, saith the lord, jehovah of hosts.
the sound thereof shall go like the serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.
but the king shall rejoice in god: every one that sweareth by him shall glory; for the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped. psalm 64 for the chief musician. a psalm of david.
and the liers-in-wait hasted, and rushed upon gibeah; and the liers-in-wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.
then said i to the angel that talked with me, whither do these bear the ephah?
happy is the people that is in such a case; `yea', happy is the people whose god is jehovah. psalm 145 `a' `psalm' `of' praise; of david.
zelek the ammonite, naharai the berothite, the armorbearer of joab the son of zeruiah,
so solomon built the house, and finished it.
judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.
having your behavior seemly among the gentiles; that, wherein they speak against you as evil-doers, they may by your good works, which they behold, glorify god in the day of visitation.
when the most high gave to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the children of men, he set the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the children of israel.
now therefore do ye with the council signify to the chief captain that he bring him down unto you, as though ye would judge of his case more exactly: and we, before he comes near, are ready to slay him.
i bought men-servants and maid-servants, and had servants born in my house; also i had great possessions of herds and flocks, above all that were before me in jerusalem;
to grant unto us that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies should serve him without fear,
and beth-nimrah, and beth-haran: fortified cities, and folds for sheep.
and they made a conspiracy against him in jerusalem; and he fled to lachish: but they sent after him to lachish, and slew him there.
then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way to the red sea, as jehovah spake unto me; and we compassed mount seir many days.
correct thy son, and he will give thee rest; yea, he will give delight unto thy soul.
the greyhound; the he-goat also; and the king against whom there is no rising up.
and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand, to remove it from ephraim's head unto manasseh's head.
that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the godless but for a moment?
and jacob boiled pottage. and esau came in from the field, and he was faint.
nicodemus answered and said unto him, how can these things be?
so midian was subdued before the children of israel, and they lifted up their heads no more. and the land had rest forty years in the days of gideon.
and david went out whithersoever saul sent him, `and' behaved himself wisely: and saul set him over the men of war, and it was good in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of saul's servants.
foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child; `but' the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
and it came to pass the selfsame day, that jehovah did bring the children of israel out of the land of egypt by their hosts.
and they were all amazed and marvelled, saying, behold, are not all these that speak galilaeans?
and as he sat on the mount of olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, tell us, when shall these things be? and what `shall be' the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
and they went out, and fled from the tomb; for trembling and astonishment had come upon them: and they said nothing to any one; for they were afraid.
and when they were come down from the high place into the city, he communed with saul upon the housetop.
and if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.
woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and establisheth a city by iniquity!
he that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.
and joseph said, give your cattle; and i will give you for your cattle, if money fail.
he brought him unto jesus. jesus looked upon him, and said, thou art simon the son of john: thou shalt be called cephas (which is by interpretation, peter).
is it not wheat harvest to-day? i will call unto jehovah, that he may send thunder and rain; and ye shall know and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of jehovah, in asking you a king.
a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the lord pitched, not man.
and it came to pass after the death of joshua, that the children of israel asked of jehovah, saying, who shall go up for us first against the canaanites, to fight against them?
let my prayer enter into thy presence; incline thine ear unto my cry.
speak not thou in thy heart, after that jehovah thy god hath thrust them out from before thee, saying, for my righteousness jehovah hath brought me in to possess this land; whereas for the wickedness of these nations jehovah doth drive them out from before thee.
and i john am he that heard and saw these things. and when i heard and saw, i fell down to worship before the feet of the angel that showed me these things.
then baruch answered them, he pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and i wrote them with ink in the book.
o god, the nations are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid jerusalem in heaps.
and i saw in the vision; now it was so, that when i saw, i was in shushan the palace, which is in the province of elam; and i saw in the vision, and i was by the river ulai.
and balak said unto balaam, come now, i will take thee unto another place; peradventure it will please god that thou mayest curse me them from thence.
and cabbon, and lahmam, and chitlish,
now in the second year of their coming unto the house of god at jerusalem, in the second month, began zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and jeshua the son of jozadak, and the rest of their brethren the priests and the levites, and all they that were come out of the captivity unto jerusalem, and appointed the levites, from twenty years old and upward, to have the oversight of the work of the house of jehovah.
i have given thee a king in mine anger, and have taken him away in my wrath.
and the wild-oxen shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls: and their land shall be drunken with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.
let me pass through thy land: i will go along by the highway, i will turn neither unto the right hand nor to the left.
therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, thus saith the lord jehovah: every man of the house of israel that taketh his idols into his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; i jehovah will answer him therein according to the multitude of his idols;
and he took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the borders of israel by the hand of messengers, saying, whosoever cometh not forth after saul and after samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. and the dread of jehovah fell on the people, and they came out as one man.
then the beasts go into coverts, and remain in their dens.
bless them that persecute you; bless, and curse not.
three years reigned he in jerusalem: and his mother's name was micaiah the daughter of uriel of gibeah. and there was war between abijah and jeroboam.
and the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, nay, my brethren, i pray you, do not so wickedly; seeing that this man is come into my house, do not this folly.
who hath ascended up into heaven, and descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in his garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?
and amazement came upon all, and they spake together, one with another, saying, what is this word? for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out.
but withal prepare me also a lodging: for i hope that through your prayers i shall be granted unto you.
the chief priests of the jews therefore said to pilate, write not, the king of the jews; but that he said, i am king of the jews.
and it is come to pass that, as he cried, and they would not hear, so they shall cry, and i will not hear, said jehovah of hosts;
then jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said unto him, is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? and he said unto them, ye know the man and what his talk was.
and their brethren that did the work of the house, eight hundred twenty and two; and adaiah the son of jeroham, the son of pelaliah, the son of amzi, the son of zechariah, the son of pashhur, the son of malchijah,
for we also once were foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another.
wherefore also god highly exalted him, and gave unto him the name which is above every name;
and all the children of israel murmured against moses and against aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, would that we had died in the land of egypt! or would that we had died in this wilderness!
and it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon joseph; and she said, lie with me.
and jehovah will take away from thee all sickness; and none of the evil diseases of egypt, which thou knowest, will he put upon thee, but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.
it shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou lettest him go free from thee; for to the double of the hire of a hireling hath he served thee six years: and jehovah thy god will bless thee in all that thou doest.
and it came to pass in those days, that she fell sick, and died: and when they had washed her, they laid her in an upper chamber.
and the ostrich, and the night-hawk, and the seamew, and the hawk after its kind,
then came isaiah the prophet unto king hezekiah, and said unto him, what said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? and hezekiah said, they are come from a far country unto me, even from babylon.
he shall receive a blessing from jehovah, and righteousness from the god of his salvation.
unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
hath at the end of these days spoken unto us in `his' son, whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the worlds;
but amasa took no heed to the sword that was in joab's hand: so he smote him therewith in the body, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. and joab and abishai his brother pursued after sheba the son of bichri.
and it turned toward the sunrising to beth-dagon, and reached to zebulun, and to the valley of iphtah-el northward to beth-emek and neiel; and it went out to cabul on the left hand,
who may go out before them, and who may come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in; that the congregation of jehovah be not as sheep which have no shepherd.
the children of gazzam, the children of uzza, the children of paseah.
i called for my lovers, `but' they deceived me: my priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought them food to refresh their souls.
for we did not follow cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our lord jesus christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
and the officers of the children of israel did see that they were in evil case, when it was said, ye shall not diminish aught from your bricks, `your' daily tasks.
i said, o jehovah, have mercy upon me: heal my soul; for i have sinned against thee.
and saul was yet the more afraid of david; and saul was david's enemy continually.
then shalt thou prosper, if thou observe to do the statutes and the ordinances which jehovah charged moses with concerning israel: be strong, and of good courage; fear not, neither be dismayed.
saying, there was in a city a judge, who feared not god, and regarded not man:
and ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best thereof: and ye shall not profane the holy things of the children of israel, that ye die not.
and when saul inquired of jehovah, jehovah answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by urim, nor by prophets.
ye mountains of gilboa, let there be no dew nor rain upon you, neither fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, the shield of saul, not anointed with oil.
o jehovah, in the morning shalt thou hear my voice; in the morning will i order `my prayer' unto thee, and will keep watch.
and the jebusite, and the amorite, and the girgashite,
and david said unto nathan, i have sinned against jehovah. and nathan said unto david, jehovah also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.
remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.
to cause it to rain on a land where no man is; on the wilderness, wherein there is no man;
and ben-hadad sent unto him, and said, the gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.
and a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that nothing might be changed concerning daniel.
that the cities which huram had given to solomon, solomon built them, and caused the children of israel to dwell there.
and the avvites made nibhaz and tartak; and the sepharvites burnt their children in the fire to adrammelech and anammelech, the gods of sepharvaim.
and they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, to bury strangers in.
since thou hast been precious in my sight, `and' honorable, and i have loved thee; therefore will i give men in thy stead, and peoples instead of thy life.
and another of the disciples said unto him, lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
he deviseth iniquity upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.
and when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was food for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the birds of the heavens had their habitation:
and jehovah said to samuel, hearken unto their voice, and make them a king. and samuel said unto the men of israel, go ye every man unto his city.
and great fear came upon the whole church, and upon all that heard these things.
the quiver rattleth against him, the flashing spear and the javelin.
they also went down into sheol with him unto them that are slain by the sword; yea, they that were his arm, `that' dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the nations.
surely i would carry it upon my shoulder; i would bind it unto me as a crown:
see, i have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;
and he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which was `outmost in' the second coupling.
and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
and ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in jerusalem; for they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of israel: and hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.
jehovah liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the god of my salvation,
and he shall offer of it all the fat thereof: the fat tail, and the fat that covereth the inwards,
and he buried him in the valley in the land of moab over against beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.
for they came up with their cattle and their tents; they came in as locusts for multitude; both they and their camels were without number: and they came into the land to destroy it.
because i feared the great multitude, and the contempt of families terrified me, so that i kept silence, and went not out of the door-
have ye not asked wayfaring men? and do ye not know their evidences,
but the word of the lord abideth for ever. and this is the word of good tidings which was preached unto you.
and the children struggled together within her. and she said, if it be so, wherefore do i live? and she went to inquire of jehovah.
and the prince of the eunuchs gave names unto them: unto daniel he gave `the name of' belteshazzar; and to hananiah, `of' shadrach; and to mishael, `of' meshach; and to azariah, `of' abed-nego.
at her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay; at her feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed, there he fell down dead.
and the sons of aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay wood in order upon the fire;
when the report cometh to egypt, they shall be sorely pained at the report of tyre.
and they stripped him, and took his head, and his armor, and sent into the land of the philistines round about, to carry the tidings unto their idols, and to the people.
and they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.
and now therefore thus saith jehovah, the god of israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, it is given into the hand of the king of babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence:
hear my prayer, o jehovah, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears: for i am a stranger with thee, a sojourner, as all my fathers were.
seemeth it a small thing unto you to have fed upon the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pasture? and to have drunk of the clear waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?
this is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, who is not able to get `that which pertaineth' to his cleansing.
and all flesh shall know that i, jehovah, have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath; it shall not return any more.
when i applied my heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the earth (for also there is that neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes),
i have put off my garment; how shall i put it on? i have washed my feet; how shall i defile them?
and jesus answered and said, as he taught in the temple, how say the scribes that the christ is the son of david?
behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for i work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, if one declare it unto you.
and jesus arose, and followed him, and `so did' his disciples.
and king solomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred `shekels' of beaten gold went to one buckler.
for the love of christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that one died for all, therefore all died;
and every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break its neck: and all the first-born of man among thy sons shalt thou redeem.
to whom also abraham divided a tenth part of all (being first, by interpretation, king of righteousness, and then also king of salem, which is king of peace;
wherefore say unto the children of israel, i am jehovah, and i will bring you out from under the burdens of the egyptians, and i will rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments:
and they shall roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea: and if one look unto the land, behold, darkness `and' distress; and the light is darkened in the clouds thereof.
and they laid it up till the morning, as moses bade: and it did not become foul, neither was there any worm therein.
pe. thy testimonies are wonderful; therefore doth my soul keep them.
but there arose certain of them that were of the synagogue called `the synagogue' of the libertines, and of the cyrenians, and of the alexandrians, and of them of cilicia and asia, disputing with stephen.
blessed be jehovah, because he hath heard the voice of my supplications.
and she said, i will surely go with thee: notwithstanding, the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honor; for jehovah will sell sisera into the hand of a woman. and deborah arose, and went with barak to kedesh.
and i said, lord, they themselves know that i imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee:
have respect unto the covenant; for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of violence.
for the son of man goeth, even as it is written of him: but woe unto that man through whom the son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had not been born.
make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices.
blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he hath been approved, he shall receive the crown of life, which `the lord' promised to them that love him.
and he had forty sons and thirty sons' sons, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged israel eight years.
be merciful unto me, o god; for man would swallow me up: all the day long he fighting oppresseth me.
your words have been stout against me, saith jehovah. yet ye say, what have we spoken against thee?
thou shalt not commit adultery.
then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god; and they cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it unto them. but jonah was gone down into the innermost parts of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.
will he make a covenant with thee, that thou shouldest take him for a servant for ever?
ye were running well; who hindered you that ye should not obey the truth?
then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man becometh worse than the first. even so shall it be also unto this evil generation.
and in the day when ye wave the sheaf, ye shall offer a he-lamb without blemish a year old for a burnt-offering unto jehovah.
and ye shall not profane my holy name; but i will be hallowed among the children of israel: i am jehovah who halloweth you,
unto the carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons, and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the house.
yea, and what are ye to me, o tyre, and sidon, and all the regions of philistia? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will i return your recompense upon your own head.
southward it was ephraim's, and northward it was manasseh's, and the sea was his border; and they reached to asher on the north, and to issachar on the east.
therefore jehovah heard, and was wroth; and a fire was kindled against jacob, and anger also went up against israel;
and these are the children of shobal: alvan and manahath and ebal, shepho and onam.
behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are accounted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.
for great is jehovah, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.
or if any one touch any unclean thing, whether it be the carcass of an unclean beast, or the carcass of unclean cattle, or the carcass of unclean creeping things, and it be hidden from him, and he be unclean, then he shall be guilty.
the threshing-floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail her.
the length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; even by the steps whereby they went up to it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.
but when i speak with thee, i will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, thus saith the lord jehovah: he that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious house.
and the building of the wall thereof was jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto pure glass.
now this is the commandment, the statutes, and the ordinances, which jehovah your god commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it;
turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.
and ye shall take possession of the land, and dwell therein; for unto you have i given the land to possess it.
and moab shall be ashamed of chemosh, as the house of israel was ashamed of beth-el their confidence.
for mordecai the jew was next unto king ahasuerus, and great among the jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the good of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.
and if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be made sure in perpetuity to him that bought it, throughout his generations: it shall not go out in the jubilee.
jesus therefore answered them and said, my teaching is not mine, but his that sent me.
for from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name `shall be' great among the gentiles; and in every place incense `shall be' offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name `shall be' great among the gentiles, saith jehovah of hosts.
in the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth `day' of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day, the hand of jehovah was upon me, and he brought me thither.
all that pass by the way rob him: he is become a reproach to his neighbors.
and they buried him in the city of david among the kings, because he had done good in israel, and toward god and his house.
and pilate again asked him, saying, answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they accuse thee of.
then satan answered jehovah, and said, doth job fear god for nought?
also hosah, of the children of merari, had sons: shimri the chief, (for though he was not the first-born, yet his father made him chief),
and i stayed in the mount, as at the first time, forty days and forty nights: and jehovah hearkened unto me that time also; jehovah would not destroy thee.
and ibneiah the son of jeroham, and elah the son of uzzi, the son of michri, and meshullam the son of shephatiah, the son of reuel, the son of ibnijah;
now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not unto them, that they told haman, to see whether mordecai's matters would stand: for he had told them that he was a jew.
for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.
and i, behold, i establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
o jehovah, i know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.
fervent lips and a wicked heart are `like' an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.
wilt thou keep the old way which wicked men have trodden?
and they journeyed from moseroth, and encamped in bene-jaakan.
moreover also i gave them statutes that were not good, and ordinances wherein they should not live;
and while peter thought on the vision, the spirit said unto him, behold, three men seek thee.
rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing stedfastly in prayer;
thou seest many things, but thou observest not; his ears are open, but he heareth not.
and the chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and brake down the walls of jerusalem.
for if that which passeth away `was' with glory, much more that which remaineth `is' in glory.
there the prisoners are at ease together; they hear not the voice of the taskmaster.
and said, hitherto shalt thou come, but no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed?
and the sons of simeon: jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin, and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman.
and of hushim he begat abitub and elpaal.
of the gods of the peoples that are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;
but whoso shall cause one of these little ones that believe on me to stumble, it is profitable for him that a great millstone should be hanged about his neck, and `that' he should be sunk in the depth of the sea.
and when he had removed him, he raised up david to be their king; to whom also he bare witness and said, i have found david the son of jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do all my will.
having condemnation, because they have rejected their first pledge.
amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned two years in jerusalem: and his mother's name was meshullemeth the daughter of haruz of jotbah.
therefore, behold, i send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: some of them shall ye kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city:
howbeit in `the business of' the ambassadors of the princes of babylon, who sent unto him to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, god left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.
(for the pharisees, and all the jews, except they wash their hands diligently, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders;
then answered one of the people, and said, thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, cursed be the man that eateth food this day. and the people were faint.
forasmuch as the sons of jonadab the son of rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them, but this people hath not hearkened unto me;
and simeon blessed them, and said unto mary his mother, behold, this `child' is set for the falling and the rising of many in israel; and for a sign which is spoken against;
and elijah said unto the prophets of baal, choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under.
who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? shall a land be born in one day? shall a nation be brought forth at once? for as soon as zion travailed, she brought forth her children.
in the beginning of the reign of jehoiakim the son of josiah, king of judah, came this word unto jeremiah from jehovah, saying,
but when they came up from egypt, and israel went through the wilderness unto the red sea, and came to kadesh;
then came in all the king's wise men; but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation.
sanctify them in the truth: thy word is truth.
he that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that harpeth on a matter separateth chief friends.
i will seek that which was lost, and will bring back that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but the fat and the strong i will destroy; i will feed them in justice.
howbeit on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruits of the land, ye shall keep the feast of jehovah seven days: on the first day shall be a solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest.
and azel had six sons, whose names are these: azrikam, bocheru, and ishmael, and sheariah, and obadiah, and hanan: these were the sons of azel.
instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou shalt make princes in all the earth.
that say, stand by thyself, come not near to me, for i am holier than thou. these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the day.
and he went up from thence to beer-sheba.
and they burnt the house of god, and brake down the wall of jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.
and i saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat thereon had a bow; and there was given unto him a crown: and he came forth conquering, and to conquer.
now the watchman was standing on the tower in jezreel, and he spied the company of jehu as he came, and said, i see a company. and joram said, take a horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, is it peace?
(for solomon had made a brazen scaffold, five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court; and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the assembly of israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven;)
add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
and he said unto them, the harvest indeed is plenteous, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore the lord of the harvest, that he send forth laborers into his harvest.
and he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shall pour out the mortar, that they scrape off, without the city into an unclean place:
a voice of the cry of the shepherds, and the wailing of the principal of the flock! for jehovah layeth waste their pasture.
if like adam i have covered my transgressions, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom,
and there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;
eat not of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire; its head with its legs and with the inwards thereof.
beside the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors, she crieth aloud:
and the elders of jabesh said unto him, give us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers unto all the borders of israel; and then, if there be none to save us, we will come out to thee.
and they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.
and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, if a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.
and the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him; and he speedily gave her her things for purification, with her portions, and the seven maidens who were meet to be given her out of the king's house: and he removed her and her maidens to the best place of the house of the women.
be not therefore anxious, saying, what shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewithal shall we be clothed?
and the jailor, being roused out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
but he shall say, i am no prophet, i am a tiller of the ground; for i have been made a bondman from my youth.
this very day shall he halt at nob: he shaketh his hand at the mount of the daughter of zion, the hill of jerusalem.
for seeing that in the wisdom of god the world through its wisdom knew not god, it was god's good pleasure through the foolishness of the preaching to save them that believe.
he that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the righteous, both of them alike are an abomination to jehovah.
o israel, trust thou in jehovah: he is their help and their shield.
where is he that is born king of the jews? for we saw his star in the east, and are come to worship him.
pass through thy land as the nile, o daughter of tarshish; there is no restraint any more.
if ye shall ask anything in my name, that will i do.
how is the faithful city become a harlot! she that was full of justice! righteousness lodged in her, but now murderers.
and after a little while they that stood by came and said to peter, of a truth thou also art `one' of them; for thy speech maketh thee known.
and balaam said unto the angel of jehovah, i have sinned; for i knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if it displease thee, i will get me back again.
brought beds, and basins, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and meal, and parched `grain', and beans, and lentils, and parched `pulse',
the voice of thy watchmen! they lift up the voice, together do they sing; for they shall see eye to eye, when jehovah returneth to zion.
tell ye your children of it, and `let' your children `tell' their children, and their children another generation.
the avenger of blood shall himself put the murderer to death: when he meeteth him, he shall put him to death.
behold, jehovah will smite with a great plague thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy substance;
or hath not the potter a right over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?
therefore made i a decree to bring in all the wise men of babylon before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.
and jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them, ahab served baal a little; but jehu will serve him much.
who knoweth the spirit of man, whether it goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast, whether it goeth downward to the earth?
and he found a certain jew named aquila, a man of pontus by race, lately come from italy, with his wife priscilla, because claudius had commanded all the jews to depart from rome: and he came unto them;
thy mother was like a vine, in thy blood, planted by the waters: it was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.
and balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw israel dwelling according to their tribes; and the spirit of god came upon him.
his disciples remembered that it was written, zeal for thy house shall eat me up.
we have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.
and the children of israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. now their cities were gibeon, and chephirah, and beeroth, and kiriath-jearim.
the first woe is past: behold, there come yet two woes hereafter.
and the seven angels that had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.
upon this i awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me.
and moses sent them to spy out the land of canaan, and said unto them, get you up this way by the south, and go up into the hill-country:
behold, they may gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall because of thee.
now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have asked for: and, behold, jehovah hath set a king over you.
for their princes are at zoan, and their ambassadors are come to hanes.
for the sceptre of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; that the righteous put not forth their hands unto iniquity.
i am not worthy of the least of all the lovingkindnesses, and of all the truth, which thou hast showed unto thy servant; for with my staff i passed over this jordan; and now i am become two companies.
and isaiah said unto them, thus shall ye say to your master, thus saith jehovah, be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of assyria have blasphemed me.
and thou shalt present the levites before jehovah. and the children of israel shall lay their hands upon the levites:
be it known therefore unto you, that this salvation of god is sent unto the gentiles: they will also hear.
go up to lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in bashan, and cry from abarim; for all thy lovers are destroyed.
and absalom said to hushai, is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?
how are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! jonathan is slain upon thy high places.
and shalt say unto them, thus saith jehovah of hosts: even so will i break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again; and they shall bury in topheth, till there be no place to bury.
and there went forth a wind from jehovah, and brought quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, about a day's journey on this side, and a day's journey on the other side, round about the camp, and about two cubits above the face of the earth.
this wisdom is not `a wisdom' that cometh down from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.
i have not turned aside from thine ordinances; for thou hast taught me.
and if his oblation for a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto jehovah be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.
let these words sink into your ears: for the son of man shall be delivered up into the hands of men.
if i regard iniquity in my heart, the lord will not hear:
he that spareth his rod hateth his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.
but she said, yea, lord: for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table.
yea, making it my aim so to preach the gospel, not where christ was `already' named, that i might not build upon another man's foundation;
for as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the nations drink continually; yea, they shall drink, and swallow down, and shall be as though they had not been.
and that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom! for he is manifold in understanding. know therefore that god exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.
and it came to pass that, when the jews that dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times from all places, ye must return unto us.
and jehovah plagued pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of sarai, abram's wife.
the nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but he shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like the whirling dust before the storm.
and it shall be, when they say unto thee, wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt say, because of the tidings, for it cometh; and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh, and it shall be done, saith the lord jehovah.
all his days also he eateth in darkness, and he is sore vexed, and hath sickness and wrath.
and they rehearsed the things `that happened' in the way, and how he was known of them in the breaking of the bread.
and jacob rose up from beer-sheba: and the sons of israel carried jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which pharaoh had sent to carry him.
for of a truth in this city against thy holy servant jesus, whom thou didst anoint, both herod and pontius pilate, with the gentiles and the peoples of israel, were gathered together,
behold, the hour cometh, yea, is come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and `yet' i am not alone, because the father is with me.
then the king made daniel great, and gave him many great gifts, and made him to rule over the whole province of babylon, and to be chief governor over all the wise men of babylon.
i will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and their dead bodies shall be for food unto the birds of the heavens, and to the beasts of the earth.
these were the sons of levi after their fathers' houses, even the heads of the fathers' `houses' of those of them that were counted, in the number of names by their polls, who did the work for the service of the house of jehovah, from twenty years old and upward.
the men of nineveh shall stand up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of jonah; and behold, a greater than jonah is here.
paul, a servant of god, and an apostle of jesus christ, according to the faith of god's elect, and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,
and of the children of issachar, men that had understanding of the times, to know what israel ought to do, the heads of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their commandment.
and mine eye shall not spare, neither will i have pity: i will bring upon thee according to thy ways; and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that i, jehovah, do smite.
and ramoth with its suburbs, and anem with its suburbs;
and she went, and came and gleaned in the field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on the portion of the field belonging unto boaz, who was of the family of elimelech.
and the young men arose and wrapped him round, and they carried him out and buried him.
by faith they passed through the red sea as by dry land: which the egyptians assaying to do were swallowed up.
and jehovah said unto him, go, return on thy way to the wilderness of damascus: and when thou comest, thou shalt anoint hazael to be king over syria;
and thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for they are most rebellious.
moreover in jerusalem did jehoshaphat set of the levites and the priests, and of the heads of the fathers' `houses' of israel, for the judgment of jehovah, and for controversies. and they returned to jerusalem.
he hath taken a bag of money with him; he will come home at the full moon.
yea, a man will say, thou hast faith, and i have works: show me thy faith apart from `thy' works, and i by my works will show thee `my' faith.
now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth `month', in the fifth `day' of the month, as i was among the captives by the river chebar, that the heavens were opened, and i saw visions of god.
and thou shalt make a screen for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer.
therefore also said the wisdom of god, i will send unto them prophets and apostles; and `some' of them they shall kill and persecute;
all this, o king, doth araunah give unto the king. and araunah said unto the king, jehovah thy god accept thee.
put not thyself forward in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great men:
therefore will we not fear, though the earth do change, and though the mountains be shaken into the heart of the seas;
but let the brother of low degree glory in his high estate:
and said unto him, art thou he that cometh, or look we for another?
and thou shalt swear, as jehovah liveth, in truth, in justice, and in righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory.
then shalt thou inquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in the midst of thee,
and ye have not known him: but i know him; and if i should say, i know him not, i shall be like unto you, a liar: but i know him, and keep his word.
and they spat upon him, and took the reed and smote him on the head.
the wise shall inherit glory; but shame shall be the promotion of fools.
then joab sent and told david all the things concerning the war;
and i say unto you, make to yourselves friends by means of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when it shall fail, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles.
he that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.
did not solomon king of israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, and he was beloved of his god, and god made him king over all israel: nevertheless even him did foreign women cause to sin.
by the hand of elasah the son of shaphan, and gemariah the son of hilkiah, (whom zedekiah king of judah sent unto babylon to nebuchadnezzar king of babylon,) saying,
for the one and twentieth to hothir, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
then came in the magicians, the enchanters, the chaldeans, and the soothsayers; and i told the dream before them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.
they shall roar together like young lions; they shall growl as lions' whelps.
and jehovah said unto moses, speak unto aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy place within the veil, before the mercy-seat which is upon the ark; that he die not: for i will appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat.
and next to him jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand;
and elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets, and said unto him, gird up thy loins, and take this vial of oil in thy hand, and go to ramoth-gilead.
and esther's maidens and her chamberlains came and told it her; and the queen was exceedingly grieved: and she sent raiment to clothe mordecai, and to take his sackcloth from off him; but he received it not.
and in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot grizzled strong horses.
he gave over their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
now these things having been thus prepared, the priests go in continually into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the services;
and this is the promise which he promised us, `even' the life eternal.
and now thou sayest, go, tell thy lord, behold, elijah `is here'; and he will slay me.
who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
and they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven.
and there came forth fire from before jehovah, and devoured them, and they died before jehovah.
and when they were come, they say unto him, teacher, we know that thou art true, and carest not for any one; for thou regardest not the person of men, but of a truth teachest the way of god: is it lawful to give tribute unto caesar, or not?
for let not wrath stir thee up against chastisements; neither let the greatness of the ransom turn thee aside.
what man is he that feareth jehovah? him shall he instruct in the way that he shall choose.
let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own; let a cloud dwell upon it; let all that maketh black the day terrify it.
and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third `month', in the first `day' of the month, that the word of jehovah came unto me, saying,
and he brought the letter to the king of israel, saying, and now when this letter is come unto thee, behold, i have sent naaman my servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.
and in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that jehovah thy god bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came unto this place.
to enjoin them that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly,
and to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles unto them, they beat them and charged them not to speak in the name of jesus, and let them go.
as for you, o house of israel, thus saith the lord jehovah: go ye, serve every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me; but my holy name shall ye no more profane with your gifts, and with your idols.
and afterward all the children of israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that jehovah had spoken with him in mount sinai.
hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness:
now i praise you that ye remember me in all things, and hold fast the traditions, even as i delivered them to you.
again shalt thou plant vineyards upon the mountains of samaria; the planters shall plant, and shall enjoy `the fruit thereof'.
and jehovah said unto moses, they shall offer their oblation, each prince on his day, for the dedication of the altar.
for if that first `covenant' had been faultless, then would no place have been sought for a second.
an unjust man is an abomination to the righteous; and he that is upright in the way is an abomination to the wicked.
she may not eat of anything that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing; all that i commanded her let her observe.
and the lord said, hear what the unrighteous judge saith.
and jehovah gave solomon wisdom, as he promised him; and there was peace between hiram and solomon; and they two made a league together.
o jehovah, the god of israel, thou art righteous; for we are left a remnant that is escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before thee in our guiltiness; for none can stand before thee because of this.
and the thing was good in the eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
and they turned and went up by the way of bashan: and og the king of bashan went out against them, he and all his people, to battle at edrei.
also upon judah came the hand of god to give them one heart, to do the commandment of the king and of the princes by the word of jehovah.
but god raised him from the dead:
and i saw no temple therein: for the lord god the almighty, and the lamb, are the temple thereof.
i say unto you, it shall be more tolerable in that day for sodom, than for that city.
for who maketh thee to differ? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? but if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?
so i hated life, because the work that is wrought under the sun was grievous unto me; for all is vanity and a striving after wind.
and their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them did joshua circumcise: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way.
for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.
the wicked are overthrown, and are not; but the house of the righteous shall stand.
ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the peoples that are round about you;
watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour.
speak unto the congregation, saying, get you up from about the tabernacle of korah, dathan, and abiram.
but now complete the doing also; that as `there was' the readiness to will, so `there may be' the completion also out of your ability.
now the men observed diligently, and hasted to catch whether it were his mind; and they said, thy brother ben-hadad. then he said, go ye, bring him. then ben-hadad came forth to him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.
and his disciples asked him what this parable might be.
and the children of israel said unto them, would that we had died by the hand of jehovah in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.
micah his son, reaiah his son, baal his son,
and the spirit of god came upon zechariah the son of jehoiada the priest; and he stood above the people, and said unto them, thus saith god, why transgress ye the commandments of jehovah, so that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken jehovah, he hath also forsaken you.
in their setting of their threshold by my threshold, and their door-post beside my door-post, and there was `but' the wall between me and them; and they have defiled my holy name by their abominations which they have committed: wherefore i have consumed them in mine anger.
for if we believe that jesus died and rose again, even so them also that are fallen asleep in jesus will god bring with him.
jesus therefore cried in the temple, teaching and saying, ye both know me, and know whence i am; and i am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not.
thus they provoked him to anger with their doings; and the plague brake in upon them.
for great is jehovah, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be feared above all gods.
ye are the light of the world. a city set on a hill cannot be hid.
again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a merchant seeking goodly pearls:
know ye not, that to whom ye present yourselves `as' servants unto obedience, his servants ye are whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?
and he said, that which proceedeth out of the man, that defileth the man.
for in the multitude of dreams there are vanities, and in many words: but fear thou god.
o jehovah, do not thine eyes look upon truth? thou hast stricken them, but they were not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return.
yea, ye would cast `lots' upon the fatherless, and make merchandise of your friend.
and i took hold of the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.
and abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.
and when jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, verily i say unto you, i have not found so great faith, no, not in israel.
but the goat, on which the lot fell for azazel, shall be set alive before jehovah, to make atonement for him, to send him away for azazel into the wilderness.
then samuel took a stone, and set it between mizpah and shen, and called the name of it eben-ezer, saying, hitherto hath jehovah helped us.
because he considereth, and turneth away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
and there was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning him: some said, he is a good man; others said, not so, but he leadeth the multitude astray.
and all the days of enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:
thus was finished all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting: and the children of israel did according to all that jehovah commanded moses; so did they.
what is man, that thou shouldest magnify him, and that thou shouldest set thy mind upon him,
for ye were bought with a price: glorify god therefore in your body.
but the seventh day is a sabbath unto jehovah thy god: `in it' thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as well as thou.
so we boiled my son, and did eat him: and i said unto her on the next day, give thy son, that we may eat him; and she hath hid her son.
and he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay that which was due.
and they shall be double beneath, and in like manner they shall be entire unto the top thereof unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.
he hath walled up my way that i cannot pass, and hath set darkness in my paths.
and when he was come to the other side into the country of the gadarenes, there met him two possessed with demons, coming forth out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man could pass by that way.
thus all israel brought up the ark of the covenant of jehovah with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding aloud with psalteries and harps.
he that denounceth his friends for a prey, even the eyes of his children shall fail.
were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that i visit them they shall be cast down, saith jehovah.
and shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to gath to achish, to seek his servants; and shimei went, and brought his servants from gath.
i think therefore that this is good by reason of the distress that is upon us, `namely,' that it is good for a man to be as he is.
and noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
and saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to keilah, to besiege david and his men.
grace to you and peace from god the father, and our lord jesus christ,
and he said unto moses, i, thy father-in-law jethro, am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.
the king of kedesh, one; the king of jokneam in carmel, one;
but look not thou on the day of thy brother in the day of his disaster, and rejoice not over the children of judah in the day of their destruction; neither speak proudly in the day of distress.
and abraham said of sarah his wife, she is my sister. and abimelech king of gerar sent, and took sarah.
and in his name shall the gentiles hope.
awake, o sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, saith jehovah of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered; and i will turn my hand upon the little ones.
and he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by everything that proceedeth out of the mouth of jehovah doth man live.
and jehovah said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people that are in egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for i know their sorrows;
but if ye say unto me, we trust in jehovah our god; is not that he, whose high places and whose altars hezekiah hath taken away, and hath said to judah and to jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar in jerusalem?
and in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is jehovah's passover.
and said, where have ye laid him? they say unto him, lord, come and see.
as oft as the trumpet `soundeth' he saith, aha! and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
and when they had accomplished all things that were according to the law of the lord, they returned into galilee, to their own city nazareth.
i will bring them again also out of the land of egypt, and gather them out of assyria; and i will bring them into the land of gilead and lebanon; and `place' shall not be found for them.
for i do not wish to see you now by the way; for i hope to tarry a while with you, if the lord permit.
the leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was food for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the birds of the heavens dwelt in the branches thereof, and all flesh was fed from it.
to them that by patience in well-doing seek for glory and honor and incorruption, eternal life:
he calleth to the heavens above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people:
he shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.
when ye are come into the land of canaan, which i give to you for a possession, and i put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession;
then said hezekiah unto isaiah, good is the word of jehovah which thou hast spoken. he said moreover, is it not so, if peace and truth shall be in my days?
for indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but god had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that i might not have sorrow upon sorrow.
then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us; and to the hills, cover us.
a fool despiseth his father's correction; but he that regardeth reproof getteth prudence.
and he said, blessed be jehovah, the god of shem; and let canaan be his servant.
for i delight in the law of god after the inward man:
so joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.
thus saith the lord jehovah unto these bones: behold, i will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live.
and the navy also of hiram, that brought gold from ophir, brought in from ophir great plenty of almug-trees and precious stones.
neither hath samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters by all thine abominations which thou hast done.
and madest known unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them commandments, and statutes, and a law, by moses thy servant,
and the babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and her soul was alienated from them.
jehovah is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that take refuge in him.
speak unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when any man of you offereth an oblation unto jehovah, ye shall offer your oblation of the cattle, `even' of the herd and of the flock.
the likeness of anything that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under the earth;
and the sons of eliab: nemuel, and dathan, and abiram. these are that dathan and abiram, who were called of the congregation, who strove against moses and against aaron in the company of korah, when they strove against jehovah,
therefore, behold, i will hedge up thy way with thorns, and i will build a wall against her, that she shall not find her paths.
and he said, whether they are come out for peace, take them alive, or whether they are come out for war, taken them alive.
for the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.
another parable spake he unto them; the kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.
but now ye glory in your vauntings: all such glorying is evil.
wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
and he measured the breadth of the opening of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits;
ashdod, its towns and its villages; gaza, its towns and its villages; unto the brook of egypt, and the great sea, and the border `thereof'.
i am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth in me, and i in him, the same beareth much fruit: for apart from me ye can do nothing.
and his servants spake yet more against jehovah god, and against his servant hezekiah.
i have loved you, saith jehovah. yet ye say, wherein hast thou loved us? was not esau jacob's brother, saith jehovah: yet i loved jacob;
and jehovah god planted a garden eastward, in eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.
ammiel the sixth, issachar the seventh, peullethai the eighth; for god blessed him.
and jehovah said unto him, this is the land which i sware unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, i will give it unto thy seed: i have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither.
shall his recompense be as thou wilt, that thou refusest it? for thou must choose, and not i: therefore speak what thou knowest.
by these three plagues was the third part of men killed, by the fire and the smoke and the brimstone, which proceeded out of their mouths.
and it shall come to pass in the latter days, that the mountain of jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.
give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.
if any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her,
that thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which thou shalt bring in from thy land that jehovah thy god giveth thee; and thou shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which jehovah thy god shall choose, to cause his name to dwell there.
for he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.
but he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper-tree: and he requested for himself that he might die, and said, it is enough; now, o jehovah, take away my life; for i am not better than my fathers.
having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember?
hheth. jehovah is my portion: i have said that i would observe thy words.
and when they were at salamis, they proclaimed the word of god in the synagogues of the jews: and they had also john as their attendant.
and i have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are not waxed old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxed old upon thy foot.
these are the commandments, which jehovah commanded moses for the children of israel in mount sinai.
and the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters decreased.
give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls before the swine, lest haply they trample them under their feet, and turn and rend you.
therefore hear, ye nations, and know, o congregation, what is among them.
so david went up thither, and his two wives also, ahinoam the jezreelitess, and abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite.
(of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts and mountains and caves, and the holes of the earth.
take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the levite as long as thou livest in thy land.
and simon answered and said, master, we toiled all night, and took nothing: but at thy word i will let down the nets.
but the path of the righteous is as the dawning light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.
if it had not been jehovah who was on our side, when men rose up against us;
howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hand; for they dealt faithfully.
and thus, sinning against the brethren, and wounding their conscience when it is weak, ye sin against christ.
for as the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so faith apart from works is dead.
and the sons of the wife of hodiah, the sister of naham, were the father of keilah the garmite, and eshtemoa the maacathite.
and their sisters were zeruiah and abigail. and the sons of zeruiah: abishai, and joab, and asahel, three.
and the three mighty men brake through the host of the philistines, and drew water out of the well of beth-lehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to david: but he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto jehovah.
and seven months shall the house of israel be burying them, that they may cleanse the land.
let the glory of jehovah endure for ever; let jehovah rejoice in his works:
we are not again commending ourselves unto you, but `speak' as giving you occasion of glorying on our behalf, that ye may have wherewith to answer them that glory in appearance, and not in heart.
heshbon, and all its cities that are in the plain; dibon, and bamoth-baal, and beth-baal-meon,
and no man shall come up with thee; neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
as an adamant harder than flint have i made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious house.
and take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for i have hoped in thine ordinances.
he walked also after their counsel, and went with jehoram the son of ahab king of israel to war against hazael king of syria at ramoth-gilead: and the syrians wounded joram.
give ear to my words, o jehovah, consider my meditation.
and the sons of kohath by their families: amram, and izhar, hebron, and uzziel.
the god of abraham, and of isaac, and of jacob, the god of our fathers, hath glorified his servant jesus; whom ye delivered up, and denied before the face of pilate, when he had determined to release him.
and jehoshaphat the king of judah returned to his house in peace to jerusalem.
because if thou shalt confess with thy mouth jesus `as' lord, and shalt believe in thy heart that god raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved:
i came to cast fire upon the earth; and what do i desire, if it is already kindled?
and bilhah rachel's handmaid conceived again, and bare jacob a second son.
and when any one shall touch any unclean thing, the uncleanness of man, or an unclean beast, or any unclean abomination, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which pertain unto jehovah, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
cursed shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
and when they led him away, they laid hold upon one simon of cyrene, coming from the country, and laid on him the cross, to bear it after jesus.
but some of them went away to the pharisees, and told them the things which jesus had done.
then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, shall a child be born unto him that is a hundred years old? and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
but the pharisees, when they heard that he had put the sadducees to silence, gathered themselves together.
and god spake all these words, saying,
and the sixth, ithream, of eglah, david's wife. these were born to david in hebron.
and joshua the son of nun, the servant of jehovah, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
here is the patience of the saints, they that keep the commandments of god, and the faith of jesus.
is this blessing then pronounced upon the circumcision, or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say, to abraham his faith was reckoned for righteousness.
ye mountains, that ye skip like rams; ye little hills, like lambs?
and jesus said, for judgment came i into this world, that they that see not may see; and that they that see may become blind.
but hath now been manifested by the appearing of our saviour christ jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel,
then were there brought unto him little children, that he should lay his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.
let israel now say, that his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever.
go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and i will take pleasure in it, and i will be glorified, saith jehovah.
her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land.
in that day shall men look unto their maker, and their eyes shall have respect to the holy one of israel.
but jesus held his peace. and the high priest said unto him, i adjure thee by the living god, that thou tell us whether thou art the christ, the son of god.
blow ye the trumpet in zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of jehovah cometh, for it is nigh at hand;
and in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, `saying', who is there like tyre, like her that is brought to silence in the midst of the sea?
and seeing one `of them' suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, smiting the egyptian:
and the residue in the length, answerable unto the holy oblation, shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward; and it shall be answerable unto the holy oblation; and the increase thereof shall be for food unto them that labor in the city.
marvel not, brethren, if the world hateth you.
and jehovah sold them into the hand of jabin king of canaan, that reigned in hazor; the captain of whose host was sisera, who dwelt in harosheth of the gentiles.
and they were come unto a place called golgotha, that is to say, the place of a skull,
but glory and honor and peace to every man that worketh good, to the jew first, and also to the greek:
and joshua smote them from kadesh-barnea even unto gaza, and all the country of goshen, even unto gibeon.
and he called him, and said unto him, what is this that i hear of thee? render the account of thy stewardship; for thou canst be no longer steward.
thus saith jehovah, behold, a people cometh from the north country; and a great nation shall be stirred up from the uttermost parts of the earth.
and jehovah spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of words, but ye saw no form; only `ye heard' a voice.
and bela the son of beor reigned in edom; and the name of his city was dinhabah.
so it was alway: the cloud covered it, and the appearance of fire by night.
and david inquired of god, saying, shall i go up against the philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into my hand? and jehovah said unto him, go up; for i will deliver them into thy hand.
and they prayed, and said, thou, lord, who knowest the hearts of all men, show of these two the one whom thou hast chosen,
and i will break the bar of damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the valley of aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house of eden; and the people of syria shall go into captivity unto kir, saith jehovah.
and david sent messengers to ish-bosheth, saul's son, saying, deliver me my wife michal, whom i betrothed to me for a hundred foreskins of the philistines.
saying, i have sinned in that i betrayed innocent blood. but they said, what is that to us? see thou `to it'.
beloved, if god so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
and they were all astonished at the majesty of god. but while all were marvelling at all the things which he did, he said unto his disciples,
the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me; and i caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
now the passover of the jews was at hand: and many went up to jerusalem out of the country before the passover, to purify themselves.
when god heard `this', he was wroth, and greatly abhorred israel;
for every one that partaketh of milk is without experience of the word of righteousness; for he is a babe.
therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth; my flesh also shall dwell in safety.
thus were the journeyings of the children of israel according to their hosts; and they set forward.
and i, behold, i have appointed with him oholiab, the son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan; and in the heart of all that are wise-hearted i have put wisdom, that they may make all that i have commanded thee:
and they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of canaan, and came into egypt, jacob, and all his seed with him:
he that hateth me hateth my father also.
then i came unto the regions of syria and cilicia.
behold, i have set the land before you: go in and possess the land which jehovah sware unto your fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them.
and the children of israel went up and wept before jehovah until even; and they asked of jehovah, saying, shall i again draw nigh to battle against the children of benjamin my brother? and jehovah said, go up against him.
and thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the ledge, and upon the border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse it and make atonement for it.
at that time, saith jehovah, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of jerusalem, out of their graves;
but when king david heard of all these things, he was very wroth.
by thy great wisdom `and' by thy traffic hast thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches;-
take the levites instead of all the first-born among the children of israel, and the cattle of the levites instead of their cattle; and the levites shall be mine: i am jehovah.
and jesus said unto him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven `have' nests; but the son of man hath not where to lay his head.
and at the south side four thousand and five hundred `reeds' by measure, and three gates: the gate of simeon, one; the gate of issachar, one; the gate of zebulun, one.
but he said unto me, behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing; for the child shall be a nazirite unto god from the womb to the day of his death.
it is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.
then shalt thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder `sisters' and thy younger; and i will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.
because thy heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before jehovah, when thou heardest what i spake against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; i also have heard thee, saith jehovah.
and i have been with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee; and i will make thee a great name, like unto the name of the great ones that are in the earth.
or think ye that the scripture speaketh in vain? doth the spirit which he made to dwell in us long unto envying?
i know how to be abased, and i know also how to abound: in everything and in all things have i learned the secret both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in want.
what advantage then hath the jew? or what is the profit of circumcision?
that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened with power through his spirit in the inward man;
so this daniel prospered in the reign of darius, and in the reign of cyrus the persian.
and they came to ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king solomon.
i am perfect; i regard not myself; i despise my life.
and moses commanded the children of israel according to the word of jehovah, saying, the tribe of the sons of joseph speaketh right.
in this thing jehovah pardon thy servant: when my master goeth into the house of rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and i bow myself in the house of rimmon, when i bow myself in the house of rimmon, jehovah pardon thy servant in this thing.
when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of god shouted for joy?
(for joab and all israel remained there six months, until he had cut off every male in edom);
for i hate putting away, saith jehovah, the god of israel, and him that covereth his garment with violence, saith jehovah of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.
and they went up by the south, and came unto hebron; and ahiman, sheshai, and talmai, the children of anak, were there. (now hebron was built seven years before zoan in egypt.)
and hukok with its suburbs, and rehob with its suburbs;
then the men of israel said unto gideon, rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also; for thou hast saved us out of the hand of midian.
then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth sin: and the sin, when it is fullgrown, bringeth forth death.
fire shall be kept burning upon the altar continually; it shall not go out.
see my hands and my feet, that it is i myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye behold me having.
sibbecai the hushathite, ilai the ahohite,
in gibeon jehovah appeared to solomon in a dream by night; and god said, ask what i shall give thee.
for jehovah hath ransomed jacob, and redeemed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.
but nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir-trees are her house.
and by a prophet jehovah brought israel up out of egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.
and david lamented with this lamentation over saul and over jonathan his son:
and there were a thousand men of benjamin with him, and ziba the servant of the house of saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went through the jordan in the presence of the king.
for in my holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of israel, saith the lord jehovah, there shall all the house of israel, all of them, serve me in the land: there will i accept them, and there will i require your offerings, and the first-fruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.
and all his fugitives in all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward every wind: and ye shall know that i, jehovah, have spoken it.
for to this end we labor and strive, because we have our hope set on the living god, who is the saviour of all men, specially of them that believe.
for jehovah thy god hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of jehovah, him and his sons for ever.
but jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in the honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.
take, i pray thee, my gift that is brought to thee; because god hath dealt graciously with me, and because i have enough. and he urged him, and he took it.
but thou shalt utterly destroy them: the hittite, and the amorite, the canaanite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite; as jehovah thy god hath commanded thee;
hast thou entered the treasuries of the snow, or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail,
the eighth to jeshaiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
my heart was hot within me; while i was musing the fire burned: `then' spake i with my tongue:
and there were more chief men found of the sons of eleazar than of the sons of ithamar; and `thus' were they divided: of the sons of eleazar there were sixteen, heads of fathers' houses; and of the sons of ithamar, according to their fathers' houses, eight.
this saying therefore went forth among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet jesus said not unto him, that he should not die; but, if i will that he tarry till i come, what `is that' to thee?
and the children of reuben built heshbon, and elealeh, and kiriathaim,
and ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled: for `these things' must needs come to pass; but the end is not yet.
peradventure there are fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou consume and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?
as a madman who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,
and i will lay waste her vines and her fig-trees, whereof she hath said, these are my hire that my lovers have given me; and i will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.
and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat; and she gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.
now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out.
and when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, wilt thou not show us what thou meanest by these?
and shall not the uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who with the letter and circumcision art a transgressor of the law?
his disciples say, lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no dark saying.
and the philistine said to david, come to me, and i will give thy flesh unto the birds of the heavens, and to the beasts of the field.
then i will set my face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that play the harlot after him, to play the harlot with molech, from among their people.
and when jesus heard it, he saith unto them, they that are whole have no need of a physician, but they that are sick: i came not to call the righteous, but sinners.
and i brought you into the land of the amorites, that dwelt beyond the jordan: and they fought with you; and i gave them into your hand, and ye possessed their land; and i destroyed them from before you.
and when it was determined that we should sail for italy, they delivered paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named julius, of the augustan band.
it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.
and all nations shall call you happy; for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith jehovah of hosts.
and if he be not redeemed by these `means', then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, he, and his children with him.
then i said, i shall die in my nest, and i shall multiply my days as the sand:
and he released him that for insurrection and murder had been cast into prison, whom they asked for; but jesus he delivered up to their will.
and i heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, go ye, and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of god into the earth.
but your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (i know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which i have given you,
and they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
thou shalt not take the name of jehovah thy god in vain: for jehovah will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
salute mary, who bestowed much labor on you.
all the flocks of kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of nebaioth shall minister unto thee; they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar; and i will glorify the house of my glory.
for my name's sake will i defer mine anger, and for my praise will i refrain for thee, that i cut thee not off.
but their plot became known to saul. and they watched the gates also day and night that they might kill him:
because that, knowing god, they glorified him not as god, neither gave thanks; but became vain in their reasonings, and their senseless heart was darkened.
but ye turned and profaned my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had let go free at their pleasure, to return; and ye brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids.
and elisha died, and they buried him. now the bands of the moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.
and the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
it is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.
when i shall make the land of egypt desolate and waste, a land destitute of that whereof it was full, when i shall smite all them that dwell therein, then shall they know that i am jehovah.
nevertheless i tell you the truth: it is expedient for you that i go away; for if i go not away, the comforter will not come unto you; but if i go, i will send him unto you.
then shalt thou understand righteousness and justice, and equity, `yea', every good path.
yea, the sparrow hath found her a house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, o jehovah of hosts, my king, and my god.
jehovah hath made himself known, he hath executed judgment: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. higgaion. selah
and when the king asked the woman, she told him. so the king appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.
they shall be left together unto the ravenous birds of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth; and the ravenous birds shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.
and jesus answered and said, o faithless and perverse generation, how long shall i be with you, and bear with you? bring hither thy son.
and out of the half-tribe of manasseh, aner with its suburbs, and bileam with its suburbs, for the rest of the family of the sons of kohath.
he made known his ways unto moses, his doings unto the children of israel.
and the sons of ulam were mighty men of valor, archers, and had many sons, and sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. all these were of the sons of benjamin.
fill their faces with confusion, that they may seek thy name, o jehovah.
then cometh jesus from galilee to the jordan unto john, to be baptized of him.
righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right.
for the assembly, there shall be one statute for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth `with you', a statute for ever throughout your generations: as ye are, so shall the sojourner be before jehovah.
for they were in three stories, and they had not pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore `the uppermost' was straitened more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.
my soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of jehovah; my heart and my flesh cry out unto the living god.
what will ye? shall i come unto you with a rod, or in love and a spirit of gentleness?
and when moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with him, then he heard the voice speaking unto him from above the mercy-seat that was upon the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim: and he spake unto him.
although thou knowest that i am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver out of thy hand?
and it was so, when the king saw esther the queen standing in the court, that she obtained favor in his sight; and the king held out to esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. so esther drew near, and touched the top of the sceptre.
and his servant said, what, should i set this before a hundred men? but he said, give the people, that they may eat; for thus saith jehovah, they shall eat, and shall leave thereof.
then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them and to their fathers.
and god hearkened unto leah, and she conceived, and bare jacob a fifth son.
but as for the cities that stood on their mounds, israel burned none of them, save hazor only; that did joshua burn.
put them in mind to be in subjection to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready unto every good work,
for, behold, jehovah commandeth, and the great house shall be smitten with breaches, and the little house with clefts.
but god clave the hollow place that is in lehi, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore the name thereof was called en-hakkore, which is in lehi, unto this day.
thy glory, o israel, is slain upon thy high places! how are the mighty fallen!
and this voice we `ourselves' heard borne out of heaven, when we were with him in the holy mount.
and ye shall call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and i will hearken unto you.
turn us again, o god; and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
and the report of him went forth into all syria: and they brought unto him all that were sick, holden with divers diseases and torments, possessed with demons, and epileptic, and palsied; and he healed them.
see, o jehovah, and behold to whom thou hast done thus! shall the women eat their fruit, the children that are dandled in the hands? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the lord?
and the angel of jehovah appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
and pharaoh said unto joseph, i am pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of egypt.
behold israel after the flesh: have not they that eat the sacrifices communion with the altar?
flee out of the midst of babylon, and go forth out of the land of the chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before the flocks.
the king spake and said, is not this great babylon, which i have built for the royal dwelling-place, by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?
for when he dieth he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him.
and jehovah said unto joshua, be not afraid because of them; for to-morrow at this time will i deliver them up all slain before israel: thou shalt hock their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.
now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which i command thee.
and to the angel of the church in philadelphia write: these things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of david, he that openeth and none shall shut, and that shutteth and none openeth:
our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
and behold, forthwith three men stood before the house in which we were, having been sent from caesarea unto me.
because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, peace; and there is no peace; and when one buildeth up a wall, behold, they daub it with untempered `mortar':
and reuben spake unto his father, saying, slay my two sons, if i bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and i will bring him to thee again.
avenge the children of israel of the midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.
and agrippa said unto paul, thou art permitted to speak for thyself. then paul stretched forth his hand, and made his defence:
and thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto jehovah thy god with a tribute of a freewill-offering of thy hand, which thou shalt give, according as jehovah thy god blesseth thee:
thou wilt render unto them a recompense, o jehovah, according to the work of their hands.
and he answering saith unto him, lord, let it alone this year also, till i shall dig about it, and dung it:
and being asked by the pharisees, when the kingdom of god cometh, he answered them and said, the kingdom of god cometh not with observation:
then the king of israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, shall i go against ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall i forbear? and they said, go up; for the lord will deliver it into the hand of the king.
then he departed from elisha, and came to his master; who said to him, what said elisha to thee? and he answered, he told me that thou wouldest surely recover.
but paul said unto them, they have beaten us publicly, uncondemned, men that are romans, and have cast us into prison; and do they now cast us out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and bring us out.
all thy rulers fled away together, they were bound by the archers; all that were found of thee were bound together; they fled afar off.
and it came to pass, that, when i had returned to jerusalem, and while i prayed in the temple, i fell into a trance,
so when they had broken their fast, jesus saith to simon peter, simon, `son' of john, lovest thou me more than these? he saith unto him, yea, lord; thou knowest that i love thee. he saith unto him, feed my lambs.
then rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the jews' language, and said, hear ye the words of the great king, the king of assyria.
for they indeed for a few days chastened `us' as seemed good to them; but he for `our' profit, that `we' may be partakers of his holiness.
all the cities which ye shall give to the levites shall be forty and eight cities; them `shall ye give' with their suburbs.
and it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew not man. and it was a custom in israel,
shadrach, meshach, and abed-nego answered and said to the king, o nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter.
for bodily exercise is profitable for a little; but godliness is profitable for all things, having promise of the life which now is, and of that which is to come.
and the remnant that is escaped of the house of judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
for their vine is of the vine of sodom, and of the fields of gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:
and she conceived again, and bare a son. and said, now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because i have borne him three sons. therefore was his name called levi.
i beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them;
of a truth i say unto you, that he will set him over all that he hath.
and kiriathaim, and sibmah, and zereth-shahar in the mount of the valley,
jesus answered and said unto them, destroy this temple, and in three days i will raise it up.
beloved, i beseech you as sojourners and pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lust, which war against the soul;
and balaam answered and said unto the servants of balak, if balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, i cannot go beyond the word of jehovah my god, to do less or more.
and they sounded, and found twenty fathoms; and after a little space, they sounded again, and found fifteen fathoms.
and twenty bowls of gold, of a thousand darics; and two vessels of fine bright brass, precious as gold.
`and that' the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, `and' a burning, `that' it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of sodom and gomorrah, admah and zeboiim, which jehovah overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath:
and when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, what is the burden of jehovah? then shalt thou say unto them, what burden! i will cast you off, saith jehovah.
and he charged the messenger, saying, when thou hast made an end of telling all the things concerning the war unto the king,
show me thy ways, o jehovah; teach me thy paths.
though noah, daniel, and job, were in it, as i live, saith the lord jehovah, they should deliver neither son nor daughter; they should but deliver their own souls by their righteousness.
now the prey, over and above the booty which the men of war took, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand sheep,
and it shall be, when ye are passed over the jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which i command you this day, in mount ebal, and thou shalt plaster them with plaster.
then therefore he delivered him unto them to be crucified.
because i knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;
or else let these men themselves say what wrong-doing they found when i stood before the council,
and he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; yea, lightnings manifold, and discomfited them.
then ye shall let your children know, saying, israel came over this jordan on dry land.
is israel a servant? is he a home-born `slave'? why is he become a prey?
thus saith jehovah: if my covenant of day and night `stand' not, if i have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth;
i will sing of the lovingkindness of jehovah for ever: with my mouth will i make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
and there was again war at gath, where was a man of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.
and king solomon and all the congregation of israel, that were assembled unto him, were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.
when thou passest through the waters, i will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
and he that sitteth on the throne said, behold, i make all things new. and he saith, write: for these words are faithful and true.
and moses said unto the judges of israel, slay ye every one his men that have joined themselves unto baal-peor.
the `son' of jesus, the `son' of eliezer, the son of jorim, the `son' of matthat, the `son' of levi,
then jerubbaal, who is gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early, and encamped beside the spring of harod: and the camp of midian was on the north side of them, by the hill of moreh, in the valley.
the `son' of melchi, the `son' of addi, the `son' of cosam, the `son' of elmadam, the `son' of er,
let a man so account of us, as of ministers of christ, and stewards of the mysteries of god.
but i know thy sitting down, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against me.
so the tongue also is a little member, and boasteth great things. behold, how much wood is kindled by how small a fire!
thou shalt not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small.
and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: and there were lice upon man, and upon beast.
and he shall set his battering engines against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.
he overlaid also the house, the beams, the thresholds, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubim on the walls.
and other fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
otherwise it will come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that i and my son solomon shall be counted offenders.
he saith, who heareth the words of god, who seeth the vision of the almighty, falling down, and having his eyes open:
whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.
then saith pilate unto him, hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?
and the elders of moab and the elders of midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto balaam, and spake unto him the words of balak.
the altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of god had given by the word of jehovah.
and the servants of saul told him, saying, on this manner spake david.
he also made his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of hinnom; and he practised augury, and used enchantments, and practised sorcery, and dealt with them that had familiar spirits, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of jehovah, to provoke him to anger.
and he instructed me, and talked with me, and said, o daniel, i am now come forth to give thee wisdom and understanding.
hath he smitten them as he smote those that smote them? or are they slain according to the slaughter of them that were slain by them?
is it not yet a very little while, and lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?
and it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of jehovah may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath jehovah brought thee out of egypt.
but unto each one of us was the grace given according to the measure of the gift of christ.
blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.
for i will declare mine iniquity; i will be sorry for my sin.
and it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when they and their father saw their bundles of money, they were afraid.
and the rest of the jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that even barnabas was carried away with their dissimulation.
and thou shalt stumble in the day, and the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night; and i will destroy thy mother.
go ye forth from babylon, flee ye from the chaldeans; with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth: say ye, jehovah hath redeemed his servant jacob.
whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul; he heareth the adjuration and uttereth nothing.
thy lovingkindness, o jehovah, is in the heavens; thy faithfulness `reacheth' unto the skies.
and the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city; in front of the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the east border, and westward in front of the five and twenty thousand toward the west border, answerable unto the portions, it shall be for the prince: and the holy oblation and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst thereof.
and he said unto me, to build her a house in the land of shinar: and when it is prepared, she shall be set there in her own place.
and he gave him no answer, not even to one word: insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.
but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of jesus his son cleanseth us from all sin.
how long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?
so she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons; they brought `the vessels' to her, and she poured out.
from thence they journeyed, and encamped on the other side of the arnon, which is in the wilderness, that cometh out of the border of the amorites: for the arnon is the border of moab, between moab and the amorites.
and all the people perceived the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off.
to deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the foreigner that flattereth with her words;
then said jeremiah unto zedekiah, thus saith jehovah, the god of hosts, the god of israel: if thou wilt go forth unto the king of babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thy house.
i have forsaken my house, i have cast off my heritage; i have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.
on the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded mehuman, biztha, harbona, bigtha, and abagtha, zethar, and carcas, the seven chamberlains that ministered in the presence of ahasuerus the king,
from kibrothhattaavah the people journeyed unto hazeroth; and they abode at hazeroth.
and when we had sailed across the sea which is off cilicia and pamphylia, we came to myra, `a city' of lycia.
and the sons of elpaal: eber, and misham, and shemed, who built ono and lod, with the towns thereof;
the mountains saw thee, and were afraid; the tempest of waters passed by; the deep uttered its voice, and lifted up its hands on high.
and moses said, consecrate yourselves to-day to jehovah, yea, every man against his son, and against his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.
for thou shalt be a witness for him unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard.
if a man shall deliver unto his neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, he shall pay double.
for now have i chosen and hallowed this house, that my name may be there for ever; and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.
and he reasoned within himself, saying, what shall i do, because i have not where to bestow my fruits?
and chesed, and hazo, and pildash, and jidlaph, and bethuel.
love suffereth long, `and' is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,
and they will come out after us, till we have drawn them away from the city; for they will say, they flee before us, as at the first: so we will flee before them;
from aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of the arnon, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the plain of medeba unto dibon;
and every one that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand:
wherefore come ye out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the lord, and touch no unclean thing; and i will receive you,
and he rained down manna upon them to eat, and gave them food from heaven.
and the angel of jehovah appeared unto him, and said unto him, jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valor.
against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and put out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,
since then the children are sharers in flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner partook of the same; that through death he might bring to nought him that had the power of death, that is, the devil;
having foreordained us unto adoption as sons through jesus christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,
and it came to pass in the morning, that jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with david, and a little lad with him.
now when saul had taken the kingdom over israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side, against moab, and against the children of ammon, and against edom, and against the kings of zobah, and against the philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he put `them' to the worse.
how canst thou say, i am not defiled, i have not gone after the baalim? see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: `thou art' a swift dromedary traversing her ways;
and when the children of israel cried unto jehovah, jehovah raised up a saviour to the children of israel, who saved them, even othniel the son of kenaz, caleb's younger brother.
and the king of israel said unto jehoshaphat, there is yet one man by whom we may inquire of jehovah: but i hate him; for he never prophesieth good concerning me, but always evil: the same is micaiah the son of imla. and jehoshaphat said, let not the king say so.
all these were the sons of heman the king's seer in the words of god, to lift up the horn. and god gave to heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
and joshua passed from lachish, and all israel with him, unto eglon; and they encamped against it, and fought against it;
and daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would appoint him a time, and he would show the king the interpretation.
i remember the days of old; i meditate on all thy doings; i muse on the work of thy hands.
and slew famous kings; for his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever:
and he said, well; i will make a league with thee; but one thing i require of thee: that is, thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring michal, saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.
i desire therefore that the younger `widows' marry, bear children, rule the household, give no occasion to the adversary for reviling:
dedan was thy trafficker in precious cloths for riding.
the sons of anah: dishon. and the sons of dishon: hamran, and eshban, and ithran, and cheran.
moreover thou shalt speak unto the levites, and say unto them, when ye take of the children of israel the tithe which i have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up a heave-offering of it for jehovah, a tithe of the tithe.
for thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean.
and when the disciples heard it, they were astonished exceedingly, saying, who then can be saved?
but nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, that had nothing, in the land of judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.
or did i commit a sin in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because i preached to you the gospel of god for nought?
holding to the faithful word which is according to the teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict the gainsayers.
behold, the days come, saith the lord jehovah, that i will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of jehovah.
for neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are sons of god, being sons of the resurrection.
esther had not yet made known her kindred nor her people; as mordecai had charged her: for esther did the commandment of mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him.
and ye see and hear, that not alone at ephesus, but almost throughout all asia, this paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they are no gods, that are made with hands:
transgressing and denying jehovah, and turning away from following our god, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
for thou sayest, my doctrine is pure, and i am clean in thine eyes.
and he said unto her, give me thy son. and he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the chamber, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.
in what place soever ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us; our god will fight for us.
he that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow of the almighty.
there are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are thrust down, and shall not be able to rise. psalm 37 `a psalm' of david.
him who knew no sin he made `to be' sin on our behalf; that we might become the righteousness of god in him.
set yourselves in array against babylon round about, all ye that bend the bow; shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned against jehovah.
and the sons of ezrah: jether, and mered, and epher, and jalon; and she bare miriam, and shammai, and ishbah the father of eshtemoa.
for the fortified city is solitary, a habitation deserted and forsaken, like the wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.
he destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomore-trees with frost.
and i will put hooks in thy jaws, and i will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales; and i will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, with all the fish of thy rivers which stick unto thy scales.
and when he had made an end of offering the tribute, he sent away the people that bare the tribute.
and moses said unto the people, fear not: for god is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not.
for thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle: thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.
shuppim also, and huppim, the sons of ir, hushim, the sons of aher.
who, having received such a charge, cast them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.
and hananiah, and elam, and anthothijah,
and the king commanded hilkiah the priest, and ahikam the son of shaphan, and achbor the son of micaiah, and shaphan the scribe, and asaiah the king's servant, saying,
and of these again shalt thou take, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; therefrom shall a fire come forth into all the house of israel.
david himself calleth him lord; and whence is he his son? and the common people heard him gladly.
and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the screen of the gate of the court. so moses finished the work.
see, i will tarry at the fords of the wilderness, until there come word from you to certify me.
exalt her, and she will promote thee; she will bring thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her.
and he took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands upon them.
in the word of truth, in the power of god; by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
and he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
and whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
he brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bonds in sunder.
go up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men go forth: cush and put, that handle the shield; and the ludim, that handle and bend the bow.
and he said unto me, they are come to pass. i am the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the end. i will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely.
nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.
and mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was mica. and all that dwelt in the house of ziba were servants unto mephibosheth.
holding faith and a good conscience; which some having thrust from them made shipwreck concerning the faith:
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto the son of god), abideth a priest continually.
where there cannot be greek and jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, scythian, bondman, freeman; but christ is all, and in all.
we are of god: he that knoweth god heareth us; he who is not of god heareth us not. by this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
though i speak, my grief is not assuaged; and though i forbear, what am i eased?
even as the duty of every day required, offering according to the commandment of moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the set feasts, three times in the year, `even' in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.
this is the generation of them that seek after him, that seek thy face, `even' jacob. selah
and they found adoni-bezek in bezek; and they fought against him, and they smote the canaanites and the perizzites.
thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to save thee.
for he perceived that for envy the chief priests had delivered him up.
and i say unto you, every one who shall confess me before men, him shall the son of man also confess before the angels of god:
but supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's journey; and they sought for him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance:
repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
for both he that sanctifieth and they that are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
and when the voice came, jesus was found alone. and they held their peace, and told no man in those days any of the things which they had seen.
for he knew him that should betray him; therefore said he, ye are not all clean.
i beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills moved to and fro.
and jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of israel; and zechariah his son reigned in his stead.
and jeroboam said to his wife, arise, i pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of jeroboam; and get thee to shiloh: behold, there is ahijah the prophet, who spake concerning me that i should be king over this people.
i will go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
speak to zerubbabel, governor of judah, saying, i will shake the heavens and the earth;
thou, jehovah, of thy favor hadst made my mountain to stand strong: thou didst hide thy face; i was troubled.
the men, and the women, and the children, and the king's daughters, and every person that nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with gedaliah the son of ahikam, the son of shaphan; and jeremiah the prophet, and baruch the son of neriah;
they chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in israel?
and saul said unto the kenites, go, depart, get you down from among the amalekites, lest i destroy you with them; for ye showed kindness to all the children of israel, when they came up out of egypt. so the kenites departed from among the amalekites.
and one of them, a lawyer, asked him a question, trying him:
then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling-place, and maintain their cause;
when a wicked man dieth, `his' expectation shall perish; and the hope of iniquity perisheth.
hear, o my people, and i will speak; o israel, and i will testify unto thee: i am god, `even' thy god.
and the whole company of them rose up, and brought him before pilate.
take thou also unto thee the chief spices: of flowing myrrh five hundred `shekels', and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty,
if any man thinketh that he knoweth anything, he knoweth not yet as he ought to know;
if i whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment; i will render vengeance to mine adversaries, and will recompense them that hate me.
thou hast commanded thy testimonies in righteousness and very faithfulness.
i am debtor both to greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish.
and sarah died in kiriath-arba (the same is hebron), in the land of canaan. and abraham came to mourn for sarah, and to weep for her.
and i saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire; and them that come off victorious from the beast, and from his image, and from the number of his name, standing by the sea of glass, having harps of god.
wherefore ye shall make images of your tumors, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the god of israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.
by night on my bed i sought him whom my soul loveth: i sought him, but i found him not.
so will the king desire thy beauty; for he is thy lord; and reverence thou him.
and jehovah smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a separate house. and jotham the king's son was over the household, judging the people of the land.
and her gates shall lament and mourn; and she shall be desolate and sit upon the ground.
and behold, elisabeth thy kinswoman, she also hath conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her that was called barren.
but the wise answered, saying, peradventure there will not be enough for us and you: go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
and within the oracle was `a space of' twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof; and he overlaid it with pure gold: and he covered the altar with cedar.
by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.
my heart is troubled, and resteth not; days of affliction are come upon me.
and it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt-offering, that jehu said to the guard and to the captains, go in, and slay them; let none come forth. and they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of baal.
she seeketh wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.
and jesus perceiving it saith unto them, why reason ye, because ye have no bread? do ye not yet perceive, neither understand? have ye your heart hardened?
and the doors had two leaves `apiece', two turning leaves: two `leaves' for the one door, and two leaves for the other.
and when they draw nigh unto jerusalem, unto bethphage and bethany, at the mount of olives, he sendeth two of his disciples,
lift up thine eyes unto the bare heights, and see; where hast thou not been lain with? by the ways hast thou sat for them, as an arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness.
jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
my heritage is become unto me as a lion in the forest: she hath uttered her voice against me; therefore i have hated her.
when thou comest into thy neighbor's vineyard, then thou mayest eat of grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any in thy vessel.
and a voice came out of the heavens, thou art my beloved son, in thee i am well pleased.
and there were certain men, who were unclean by reason of the dead body of a man, so that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came before moses and before aaron on that day:
jesus answered and said, this voice hath not come for my sake, but for your sakes.
thus did the children of israel; according to all that jehovah commanded moses, so did they.
and the arvadite, and the zemarite, and the hamathite.
howbeit the `son' by the handmaid is born after the flesh; but the `son' by the freewoman `is born' through promise.
where is the den of the lions, and the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion `and' the lioness walked, the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?
i did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.
for thus saith jehovah: behold, they to whom it pertained not to drink of the cup shall assuredly drink; and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink.
as he saith also in hosea, i will call that my people, which was not my people; and her beloved, that was not beloved.
therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly in an instant.
and ahab said unto obadiah, go through the land, unto all the fountains of water, and unto all the brooks: peradventure we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the beasts.
in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.
let me sing for my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. my wellbeloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:
go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise:
howbeit the high places were not taken away: the people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. he built the upper gate of the house of jehovah.
but the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of jehovah shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume; in smoke shall they consume away.
but to you i say, to the rest that are in thyatira, as many as have not this teaching, who know not the deep things of satan, as they are wont to say; i cast upon you none other burden.
the meek also shall increase their joy in jehovah, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of israel.
and as for thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, whom thou shalt have; of the nations that are round about you, of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.
these are the two olive trees and the two candlesticks, standing before the lord of the earth.
and the serpent said unto the woman, ye shall not surely die:
now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.
and i saw another angel flying in mid heaven, having eternal good tidings to proclaim unto them that dwell on the earth, and unto every nation and tribe and tongue and people;
for i say unto you, i shall not drink from henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of god shall come.
yet these may ye eat of all winged creeping things that go upon all fours, which have legs above their feet, wherewith to leap upon the earth.
and all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him to death with stones; as jehovah commanded moses.
for jehovah hath made the jordan a border between us and you, ye children of reuben and children of gad; ye have no portion in jehovah: so might your children make our children cease from fearing jehovah.
lo, i will bring a nation upon you from far, o house of israel, saith jehovah: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they say.
and i will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though i shot at a mark.
son of man, hath not the house of israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee, what doest thou?
and if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
now the hebrews that were with the philistines as beforetime, and that went up with them into the camp, `from the country' round about, even they also `turned' to be with the israelites that were with saul and jonathan.
for there stood by me this night an angel of the god whose i am, whom also i serve,
and they shall cover the face of the earth, so that one shall not be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field:
and he made the porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits; and a porch before them; and pillars and a threshold before them.
now concerning the collection for the saints, as i gave order to the churches of galatia, so also do ye.
when pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, show a wonder for you; then thou shalt say unto aaron, take thy rod, and cast it down before pharaoh, that it become a serpent.
his substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the children of the east.
and absalom set amasa over the host instead of joab. now amasa was the son of a man, whose name was ithra the israelite, that went in to abigal the daughter of nahash, sister to zeruiah, joab's mother.
now therefore, i pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thy handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.
but one passed by, and, lo, he was not: yea, i sought him, but he could not be found.
for all these things do the nations of the world seek after: but your father knoweth that ye have need of these things.
he shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.
and the king said, let him turn to his own house, but let him not see my face. so absalom turned to his own house, and saw not the king's face.
now the rest of the acts of shallum, and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel.
but turned back, and dealt treacherously like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;
and as they spake these things, he himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, peace `be' unto you.
the children of arah, seven hundred seventy and five.
they shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break a bone thereof: according to all the statute of the passover they shall keep it.
and his master saw that jehovah was with him, and that jehovah made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
if these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then jehovah hath not sent me.
even as i also please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the `profit' of the many, that they may be saved.
son of man, set thy face against mount seir, and prophesy against it,
thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as an antelope in a net; they are full of the wrath of jehovah, the rebuke of thy god.
why criest thou for thy hurt? thy pain is incurable: for the greatness of thine iniquity, because thy sins were increased, i have done these things unto thee.
but when the fruit is ripe, straightway he putteth forth the sickle, because the harvest is come.
then came near the heads of fathers' `houses' of the levites unto eleazar the priest, and unto joshua the son of nun, and unto the heads of fathers' `houses' of the tribes of the children of israel;
wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, i am god? but thou art man, and not god, in the hand of him that woundeth thee.
and she said, behold, my maid bilhah, go in unto her; that she may bear upon my knees, and i also may obtain children by her.
the poor man and the oppressor meet together; jehovah lighteneth the eyes of them both.
and solomon made affinity with pharaoh king of egypt, and took pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of david, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of jehovah, and the wall of jerusalem round about.
woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? these are the gods that smote the egyptians with all manner of plagues in the wilderness.
and jephthah said unto them, i and my people were at great strife with the children of ammon; and when i called you, ye saved me not out of their hand.
he only is my rock and my salvation: `he is' my high tower; i shall not be greatly moved.
let him take his rod away from me, and let not his terror make me afraid:
therefore i make a decree, that every people, nation, and language, which speak anything amiss against the god of shadrach, meshach, and abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill; because there is no other god that is able to deliver after this sort.
and i will make drunk her princes and her wise men, her governors and her deputies, and her mighty men; and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the king, whose name is jehovah of hosts.
so that the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the heavens, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.
i have not sat with men of falsehood; neither will i go in with dissemblers.
and david said, what have i now done? is there not a cause?
and azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out quickly from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because jehovah had smitten him.
wherefore jesus also, that he might sanctify the people through his own blood, suffered without the gate.
pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker:
in the third month after the children of israel were gone forth out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of sinai.
thus saith the lord jehovah: thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup, which is deep and large; thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much.
come, and see the works of god; `he is' terrible in his doing toward the children of men.
but unto the married i give charge, `yea' not i, but the lord, that the wife depart not from her husband
let the lying lips be dumb, which speak against the righteous insolently, with pride and contempt.
with us are both the gray-headed and the very aged men, much elder than thy father.
set up a standard against the walls of babylon, make the watch strong, set the watchmen, prepare the ambushes; for jehovah hath both purposed and done that which he spake concerning the inhabitants of babylon.
and thou shalt put upon aaron the holy garments; and thou shalt anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.
and i have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of my hand, that i may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto zion, thou art my people.
not because we have not the right, but to make ourselves and ensample unto you, that ye should imitate us.
and their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, `even' the wheels that they four had.
and it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our god; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is jehovah; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
moreover also i sware unto them in the wilderness, that i would not bring them into the land which i had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands;
and it shall be for a sign upon thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand jehovah brought us forth out of egypt.
but this i say by way of concession, not of commandment.
so then they that are of faith are blessed with the faithful abraham.
thou, o king, sawest, and, behold, a great image. this image, which was mighty, and whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the aspect thereof was terrible.
now before this, eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our god, being allied unto tobiah,
and david was then in the stronghold; and the garrison of the philistines was then in beth-lehem.
but their eyes were holden that they should not know him.
the son of amariah, the son of azariah, the son of meraioth,
and they journeyed from mount hor, and encamped in zalmonah.
then the king ahasuerus said unto esther the queen and to mordecai the jew, behold, i have given esther the house of haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the jews.
and all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all their host shall fade away, as the leaf fadeth from off the vine, and as a fading `leaf' from the fig-tree.
hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be made full.
and they that know thy name will put their trust in thee; for thou, jehovah, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
if thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, that is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;
arise, o jehovah, in thine anger; lift up thyself against the rage of mine adversaries, and awake for me; thou hast commanded judgment.
they wander as blind men in the streets, they are polluted with blood, so that men cannot touch their garments.
to whom `be' the glory for ever and ever. amen.
and he came in unto her, and said, hail, thou that art highly favored, the lord `is' with thee.
in all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.
being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are through jesus christ, unto the glory and praise of god.
the chief was ahiezer; then joash, the sons of shemaah the gibeathite, and jeziel, and pelet, the sons of azmaveth, and beracah, and jehu the anathothite,
and if a woman have an issue of her blood many days not in the time of her impurity, or if she have an issue beyond the time of her impurity; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness she shall be as in the days of her impurity: she is unclean.
that say to the seers, see not; and to the prophets, prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits,
and the sons of the prophets said unto elisha, behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too strait for us.
who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? i, jehovah, the first, and with the last, i am he.
and i will bring upon that land all my words which i have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.
which is easier, to say, thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say, arise and walk?
so jephthah passed over unto the children of ammon to fight against them; and jehovah delivered them into his hand.
for it shall be that, as wandering birds, as a scattered nest, so shall the daughters of moab be at the fords of the arnon.
a noose is hid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.
in the day when god shall judge the secrets of men, according to my gospel, by jesus christ.
i adjure you, o daughters of jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, that i am sick from love.
and he said, behold now, i have taken upon me to speak unto the lord: peradventure there shall be twenty found there. and he said, i will not destroy it for the twenty's sake.
and he shall take away its crop with the filth thereof, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, in the place of the ashes:
and behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine: let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die.
but when paul perceived that the one part were sadducees and the other pharisees, he cried out in the council, brethren, i am a pharisee, a son of pharisees: touching the hope and resurrection of the dead i am called in question.
and sarah laughed within herself, saying, after i am waxed old shall i have pleasure, my lord being old also?
and the sons of ephraim: shuthelah, and bered his son, and tahath his son, and eleadah his son, and tahath his son,
flee ye, wander far off, dwell in the depths, o ye inhabitants of hazor, saith jehovah; for nebuchadrezzar king of babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.
my soul is continually in my hand; yet do i not forget thy law.
then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is slain:
him would paul have to go forth with him; and he took and circumcised him because of the jews that were in those parts: for they all knew that his father was a greek.
the sower soweth the word.
and his signs, and his works, which he did in the midst of egypt unto pharaoh the king of egypt, and unto all his land;
i clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with sealskin, and i girded thee about with fine linen, and covered thee with silk.
and i will walk among you, and will be your god, and ye shall be my people.
and it came to pass, when the king of israel had read the letter, that he rent his clothes, and said, am i god, to kill and to make alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy? but consider, i pray you, and see how he seeketh a quarrel against me.
wast thou called being a bondservant? care not for it: nay, even if thou canst become free, use `it' rather.
say not, i will do so to him as he hath done to me; i will render to the man according to his work.
now therefore, o our god, hearken unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the lord's sake.
and i fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, saul, saul, why persecutest thou me?
hearken unto this, o job: stand still, and consider the wondrous works of god.
now while they were going, behold, some of the guard came into the city, and told unto the chief priests all the things that were come to pass.
he that overcometh, i will make him a pillar in the temple of my god, and he shall go out thence no more: and i will write upon him the name of my god, and the name of the city of my god, the new jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my god, and mine own new name.
who, knowing the ordinance of god, that they that practise such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also consent with them that practise them.
i have commanded my consecrated ones, yea, i have called my mighty men for mine anger, even my proudly exulting ones.
and the archers shot at king josiah; and the king said to his servants, have me away; for i am sore wounded.
if i have despised the cause of my man-servant or of my maid-servant, when they contended with me;
i have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green tree in its native soil.
what is man, that he should be clean? and he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
she hath sent forth her maidens; she crieth upon the highest places of the city:
for, i think, god hath set forth us the apostles last of all, as men doomed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, both to angels and men.
and pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. and there was written, jesus of nazareth, the king of the jews.
gomer, and all his hordes; the house of togarmah in the uttermost parts of the north, and all his hordes; even many peoples with thee.
but he said unto her, thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. what? shall we receive good at the hand of god, and shall we not receive evil? in all this did not job sin with his lips.
i am the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.
and their sins and their iniquities will i remember no more.
(behold, i come as a thief. blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walked naked, and they see his shame.)
and naomi said unto ruth her daughter-in-law, it is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, and that they meet thee not in any other field.
behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest; and i will give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be solomon, and i will give peace and quietness unto israel in his days:
and he answered, i have not troubled israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of jehovah, and thou hast followed the baalim.
seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him.
but as for me, i am like a green olive-tree in the house of god: i trust in the lovingkindness of god for ever and ever.
and his mother answered and said, not so; but he shall be called john.
and jeroboam the son of nebat, an ephraimite of zeredah, a servant of solomon, whose mother's name was zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his hand against the king.
wherefore thou art without excuse, o man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judges another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest dost practise the same things.
for surely there is a reward; and thy hope shall not be cut off.
then believed they his words; they sang his praise.
so jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no food the second day of the month; for he was grieved for david, because his father had done him shame.
why look ye askance, ye high mountains, at the mountain which god hath desired for his abode? yea, jehovah will dwell `in it' for ever.
on the cliff she dwelleth, and maketh her home, upon the point of the cliff, and the stronghold.
have i conceived all this people? have i brought them forth, that thou shouldest say unto me, carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing-father carrieth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?
only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which jehovah shall choose:
for he is a minister of god to thee for good. but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is a minister of god, an avenger for wrath to him that doeth evil.
and uriah said unto david, the ark, and israel, and judah, abide in booths; and my lord joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open field; shall i then go into my house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, i will not do this thing.
lead me, o jehovah, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make thy way straight before my face.
then said `jehu' to bidkar his captain, take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of naboth the jezreelite; for remember how that, when i and thou rode together after ahab his father, jehovah laid this burden upon him:
and the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand;
woe is me, that i sojourn in meshech, that i dwell among the tents of kedar!
she saith unto him, yea, lord: i have believed that thou art the christ, the son of god, `even' he that cometh into the world.
for there is nothing hid, save that it should be manifested; neither was `anything' made secret, but that it should come to light.
when i thought how i might know this, it was too painful for me;
and, whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it, he is a debtor.
jehovah hath also a controversy with judah, and will punish jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he recompense him.
and they heard the voice of jehovah god walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of jehovah god amongst the trees of the garden.
and they took up asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in beth-lehem. and joab and his men went all night, and the day brake upon them at hebron.
beloved, no new commandment write i unto you, but an old commandment which ye had from the beginning: the old commandment is the word which ye heard.
but when his brethren were gone up unto the feast, then went he also up, not publicly, but as it were in secret.
as for this image, its head was of fine gold, its breast and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass,
i will give thanks unto thee; for thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation.
and the men of shechem set liers-in-wait for him on the tops of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them: and it was told abimelech.
and build an altar unto jehovah thy god upon the top of this stronghold, in the orderly manner, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt-offering with the wood of the asherah which thou shalt cut down.
therefore hath jehovah watched over the evil, and brought it upon us; for jehovah our god is righteous in all his works which he doeth, and we have not obeyed his voice.
and all the guests of adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way.
and he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the mortar of the house; and he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
on the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do no servile work;
yet will i leave a remnant, in that ye shall have some that escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.
and next to him repaired ezer the son of jeshua, the ruler of mizpah, another portion, over against the ascent to the armory at the turning `of the wall'.
these are that aaron and moses, to whom jehovah said, bring out the children of israel from the land of egypt according to their hosts.
he that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh through a wall, a serpent shall bite him.
and i will give them one heart, and i will put a new spirit within you; and i will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh;
and said, verily i say unto you, except ye turn, and become as little children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.
and they turned and went up into the hill-country, and came unto the valley of eshcol, and spied it out.
and god said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
and the sons of shemida were ahian, and shechem, and likhi, and aniam.
and barzillai the gileadite came down from rogelim; and he went over the jordan with the king, to conduct him over the jordan.
and their villages were etam, and ain, rimmon, and tochen, and ashan, five cities;
now when she had weaned lo-ruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son.
(the lord grant unto him to find mercy of the lord in that day); and in how many things he ministered at ephesus, thou knowest very well.
and they sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all, according as any man had need.
not according to the covenant that i made with their fathers in the day that i took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of egypt; which my covenant they brake, although i was a husband unto them, saith jehovah.
and their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
but though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you any gospel other than that which we preached unto you, let him be anathema.
if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.
and it came to pass, when god helped the levites that bare the ark of the covenant of jehovah, that they sacrificed seven bullocks and seven rams.
and the king, and all israel with him, offered sacrifice before jehovah.
now when he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, there was carried out one that was dead, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of the city was with her.
cast forth lightning, and scatter them; send out thine arrows, and discomfit them.
and there came one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls, who were laden with the seven last plagues; and he spake with me, saying, come hither, i will show thee the bride, the wife of the lamb.
then king rehoboam sent adoram, who was over the men subject to taskwork; and all israel stoned him to death with stones. and king rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to jerusalem.
wherefore are we counted as beasts, `and' are become unclean in your sight?
and esau hated jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him. and esau said in his heart, the days of mourning for my father are at hand. then will i slay my brother jacob.
but as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped.
then drew near the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of manasseh the son of joseph; and these are the names of his daughters: mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.
for after this manner aforetime the holy women also, who hoped in god, adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands:
and also the burnt-offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace-offerings, and with the drink-offerings for every burnt-offering. so the service of the house of jehovah was set in order.
set ye up an ensign upon the bare mountain, lift up the voice unto them, wave the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
thy commandments make me wiser than mine enemies; for they are ever with me.
and if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver up the manslayer into his hand; because he smote his neighbor unawares, and hated him not beforetime.
they that make them shall be like unto them; yea, every one that trusteth in them.
render unto her even as she rendered, and double `unto her' the double according to her works: in the cup which she mingled, mingle unto her double.
and unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened mingled with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of fine wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
and uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a separate house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of jehovah: and jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land.
yea, my heart will rejoice, when thy lips speak right things.
and asahel pursued after abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following abner.
samaria shall bear her guilt; for she hath rebelled against her god: they shall fall by the sword; their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.
there was in the days of herod, king of judaea, a certain priest named zacharias, of the course of abijah: and he had a wife of the daughters of aaron, and her name was elisabeth.
and the sons of midian: ephah, and epher, and hanoch, and abida, and eldaah. all these were the children of keturah.
and there were arches round about, five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.
and he fell upon his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a samaritan.
speak, and say, thus saith the lord jehovah: behold, i am against thee, pharaoh king of egypt, the great monster that lieth in the midst of his rivers, that hath said, my river is mine own, and i have made it for myself.
the voice of thy thunder was in the whirlwind; the lightnings lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.
i receive not glory from men.
but now thy kingdom shall not continue: jehovah hath sought him a man after his own heart, and jehovah hath appointed him to be prince over his people, because thou hast not kept that which jehovah commanded thee.
he hath given help to israel his servant, that he might remember mercy
speak unto the children of israel, when a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, so as to trespass against jehovah, and that soul shall be guilty;
ought ye not to know that jehovah, the god of israel, gave the kingdom over israel to david for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?
and he burnt his burnt-offering and his meal-offering, and poured his drink-offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace-offerings, upon the altar.
and jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.
and ain with its suburbs, and juttah with its suburbs, `and' beth-shemesh with its suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.
when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be marvelled at in all them that believed (because our testimony unto you was believed) in that day.
therefore they turned their backs before the men of israel unto the way of the wilderness; but the battle followed hard after them; and they that came out of the cities destroyed them in the midst thereof.
son of man, behold, i take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet thou shalt neither mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.
their quiver is an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.
with him will i speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches; and the form of jehovah shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against moses?
when he established the heavens, i was there: when he set a circle upon the face of the deep,
o ye seed of abraham his servant, ye children of jacob, his chosen ones.
my son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.
but god turned, and gave them up to serve the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the prophets, did ye offer unto me slain beasts and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, o house of israel?
and saith unto him, every man setteth on first the good wine; and when `men' have drunk freely, `then' that which is worse: thou hast kept the good wine until now.
for we hear of some that walk among you disorderly, that work not at all, but are busybodies.
and jehovah descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of jehovah.
and the messenger that went to call micaiah spake to him, saying, behold, the words of the prophets `declare' good to the king with one mouth: let thy word therefore, i pray thee, be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.
but let each man prove his own work, and then shall he have his glorying in regard of himself alone, and not of his neighbor.
and the sons of issachar: tola, and puvah, and iob, and shimron.
and a river went out of eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became four heads.
cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou shalt find it after many days.
cease, my son, to hear instruction `only' to err from the words of knowledge.
and for about the time of forty years as a nursing-father bare he them in the wilderness.
i will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.
and jehovah prepared a great fish to swallow up jonah; and jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
and the king said unto zadok, carry back the ark of god into the city: if i shall find favor in the eyes of jehovah, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation:
and first i will recompense their iniquity and their sin double, because they have polluted my land with the carcasses of their detestable things, and have filled mine inheritance with their abominations.
thus he showed me: and, behold, the lord stood beside a wall made by a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand.
so sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at nineveh.
and ram begat amminadab; and amminadab begat nahshon; and nahshon begat salmon;
but he refused, and said, i will not eat. but his servants, together with the woman, constrained him; and he hearkened unto their voice. so he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.
and it came to pass, that the beggar died, and that he was carried away by the angels into abraham's bosom: and the rich man also died, and was buried.
now while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well.
he is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and with continual strife in his bones;
nay, but ye yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that `your' brethren.
and when the messengers came in, behold, the teraphim was in the bed, with the pillow of goats' `hair' at the head thereof.
and the doors of the side-chambers were toward `the place' that was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.
and the two companies of you, even all that go forth on the sabbath, shall keep the watch of the house of jehovah about the king.
now the parable is this: the seed is the word of god.
if therefore the uncircumcision keep the ordinances of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be reckoned for circumcision?
and he took him into the field of zophim, to the top of pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
even he shall build the temple of jehovah; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
for ye bear with a man, if he bringeth you into bondage, if he devoureth you, if he taketh you `captive', if he exalteth himself, if he smiteth you on the face.
and the robbers also that were crucified with him cast upon him the same reproach.
for this gird you with sackcloth, lament and wail; for the fierce anger of jehovah is not turned back from us.
and jonathan answered saul, david earnestly asked leave of me to go to beth-lehem:
but their minds were hardened: for until this very day at the reading of the old covenant the same veil remaineth, it not being revealed `to them' that it is done away in christ.
and elijah said unto elisha, tarry here, i pray thee; for jehovah hath sent me as far as beth-el. and elisha said, as jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, i will not leave thee. so they went down to beth-el.
and out of the ground jehovah god formed every beast of the field, and every bird of the heavens; and brought them unto the man to see what he would call them: and whatsoever the man called every living creature, that was the name thereof.
and they put him in ward, that it might be declared unto them at the mouth of jehovah.
he ruleth by his might for ever; his eyes observe the nations: let not the rebellious exalt themselves. selah
all chastening seemeth for the present to be not joyous but grievous; yet afterward it yieldeth peaceable fruit unto them that have been exercised thereby, `even the fruit' of righteousness.
for true and righteous are his judgments; for he hath judged the great harlot, her that corrupted the earth with her fornication, and he hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.
and when they that bare the ark were come unto the jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brink of the water (for the jordan overfloweth all its banks all the time of harvest,)
and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any foreigner that is not of thy seed.
and to know the love of christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled unto all the fulness of god.
i will send my terror before thee, and will discomfit all the people to whom thou shalt come, and i will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.
and upon her forehead a name written, mystery, babylon the great, the mother of the harlots and of the abominations of the earth.
if there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of that which chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:
therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wolves shall dwell there, and the ostriches shall dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.
but it shall hail in the downfall of the forest; and the city shall be utterly laid low.
in hope of eternal life, which god, who cannot lie, promised before times eternal;
i was also perfect with him, and i kept myself from mine iniquity.
therefore speak i to them in parables; because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.
and the children of ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entrance of the gate: and the syrians of zobah and of rehob, and the men of tob and maacah, were by themselves in the field.
neither from the hand of a foreigner shall ye offer the bread of your god of any of these; because their corruption is in them, there is a blemish in them: they shall not be accepted for you.
but if the spirit of him that raised up jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he that raised up christ jesus from the dead shall give life also to your mortal bodies through his spirit that dwelleth in you.
when therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, saying, crucify `him', crucify `him'! pilate saith unto them, take him yourselves, and crucify him: for i find no crime in him.
i will say to the north, give up; and to the south, keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth;
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
because with lies ye have grieved the heart of the righteous, whom i have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, and be saved alive:
and mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to know how esther did, and what would become of her.
and jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, have her forth between the ranks; and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword: for the priest said, slay her not in the house of jehovah.
and it shall come to pass, that because of the abundance of milk which they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the midst of the land.
the angel of jehovah encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.
but if any man buildeth on the foundation gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, stubble;
and one he-goat for a sin-offering; besides the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and their drink-offerings.
then the elders of the congregation said, how shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of benjamin?
and he said unto them, therefore every scribe who hath been made a disciple to the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a householder, who bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old.
i have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, o babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against jehovah.
the king of eglon, one; the king of gezer, one;
be thou to me a rock of habitation, whereunto i may continually resort: thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my fortress.
because they have wrought folly in israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors' wives, and have spoken words in my name falsely, which i commanded them not; and i am he that knoweth, and am witness, saith jehovah.
and his head and his hair were white as white wool, `white' as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;
and he put away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
that thou mightest know the certainty concerning the things wherein thou wast instructed.
and thus shalt thou do unto aaron, and to his sons, according to all that i have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
and david did as god commanded him: and they smote the host of the philistines from gibeon even to gezer.
he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me, and i in him.
these sought their register `among' those that were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.
and there was set food before him to eat. but he said, i will not eat, until i have told mine errand. and he said, speak on.
in the twenty and seventh year of asa king of judah did zimri reign seven days in tirzah. now the people were encamped against gibbethon, which belonged to the philistines.
the churches of asia salute you. aquila and prisca salute you much in the lord, with the church that is in their house.
thou believest that god is one; thou doest well: the demons also believe, and shudder.
and solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand that were hewers in the mountains;
and gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten; for he had many wives.
of the children of issachar, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
he saith unto them, how then doth david in the spirit call him lord, saying,
then esther bade them return answer unto mordecai,
he hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
and nathan said unto david, do all that is in thy heart; for god is with thee.
and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land. must i needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
i rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.
now jehoram the son of ahab began to reign over israel in samaria in the eighteenth year of jehoshaphat king of judah, and reigned twelve years.
and, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even: now the man was of the hill-country of ephraim, and he sojourned in gibeah; but the men of the place were benjamites.
by the way which he dedicated for us, a new and living way, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;
is there injustice on my tongue? cannot my taste discern mischievous things?
for all the armor of the armed man in the tumult, and the garments rolled in blood, shall be for burning, for fuel of fire.
but moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
now therefore stand still and see this great thing, which jehovah will do before your eyes.
and benaiah the son of jehoiada was over the host; and zadok and abiathar were priests;
but when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children that were crying in the temple and saying, hosanna to the son of david; they were moved with indignation,
and of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five `shekels' he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their capitals, and made fillets for them.
to speak evil of no man, not to be contentious, to be gentle, showing all meekness toward all men.
for in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain even of your own poets have said, for we are also his offspring.
and straightway he constrained his disciples to enter into the boat, and to go before `him' unto the other side to bethsaida, while he himself sendeth the multitude away.
and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.
that they may all be one; even as thou, father, `art' in me, and i in thee, that they also may be in us: that the world may believe that thou didst send me.
o earth, earth, earth, hear the word of jehovah.
for he that soweth unto his own flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth unto the spirit shall of the spirit reap eternal life.
this is he that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel that spake to him in the mount sinai, and with our fathers: who received living oracles to give unto us:
now when morning was come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against jesus to put him to death:
the slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting; but the precious substance of men `is to' the diligent.
why art thou cast down, o my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in god; for i shall yet praise him, `who is' the help of my countenance, and my god. psalm 44 for the chief musician. `a psalm' of the sons of korah. maschil.
the seventh to jesharelah, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
and jehovah said unto moses, is jehovah's hand waxed short? now shalt thou see whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not.
amon his son, josiah his son.
now it came to pass in the seventh month, that ishmael the son of nethaniah, the son of elishama, of the seed royal and `one of' the chief officers of the king, and ten men with him, came unto gedaliah the son of ahikam to mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in mizpah.
when he giveth quietness, who then can condemn? and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him? alike whether `it be done' unto a nation, or unto a man:
peter therefore denied again: and straightway the cock crew.
who can count the dust of jacob, or number the fourth part of israel? let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!
what mean ye that ye crush my people, and grind the face of the poor? saith the lord, jehovah of hosts.
and when they had crossed over, they came to the land, unto gennesaret.
but if they say thus, come up unto us; then we will go up; for jehovah hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be the sign unto us.
there were they in great fear; for god is in the generation of the righteous.
and i saw when the lamb opened one of the seven seals, and i heard one of the four living creatures saying as with a voice of thunder, come.
and it was so, when elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entrance of the cave. and, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, what doest thou here, elijah?
and with all deceit of unrighteousness for them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
and forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may trample them.
he wrote also letters, to rail on jehovah, the god of israel, and to speak against him, saying, as the gods of the nations of the lands, which have not delivered their people out of my hand, so shall not the god of hezekiah deliver his people out of my hand.
and the spirit of jehovah fell upon me, and he said unto me, speak, thus saith jehovah: thus have ye said, o house of israel; for i know the things that come into your mind.
and when ye go to war in your land against the adversary that oppresseth you, then ye shall sound an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before jehovah your god, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.
and when he had said this, and had taken bread, he gave thanks to god in the presence of all; and he brake it, and began to eat.
and the people stood beholding. and the rulers also scoffed at him, saying, he saved others; let him save himself, if this is the christ of god, his chosen.
i said, in the noontide of my days i shall go into the gates of sheol: i am deprived of the residue of my years.
and fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of judaea.
but prophesy not again any more at beth-el; for it is the king's sanctuary, and it is a royal house.
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made the footstool of his feet.
and thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it in their sight with dung that cometh out of man.
and, behold, one in the likeness of the sons of men touched my lips: then i opened my mouth, and spake and said unto him that stood before me, o my lord, by reason of the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and i retain no strength.
in a moment they die, even at midnight; the people are shaken and pass away, and the mighty are taken away without hand.
so as to incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thy heart to understanding;
make an uproar, o ye peoples, and be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces.
they ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day that noah entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.
arise ye, and depart; for this is not your resting-place; because of uncleanness that destroyeth, even with a grievous destruction.
jesus answered and said unto him, art thou the teacher of israel, and understandest not these things?
and pharaoh said, who is jehovah, that i should hearken unto his voice to let israel go? i know not jehovah, and moreover i will not let israel go.
o god, `thou art' terrible out of thy holy places: the god of israel, he giveth strength and power unto `his' people. blessed be god. psalm 69 for the chief musician; set to shoshanim. `a psalm' of david.
ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
and tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away.
deliver me from bloodguiltiness, o god, thou god of my salvation; `and' my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
and jehovah said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and stand before pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, thus saith jehovah, let my people go, that they may serve me.
and the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, what man is there that is fearful and faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart melt as his heart.
son of man, say unto the prince of tyre, thus saith the lord jehovah: because thy heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, i am a god, i sit in the seat of god, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art man, and not god, though thou didst set thy heart as the heart of god;-
now judas also, who betrayed him, knew the place: for jesus oft-times resorted thither with his disciples.
but brother goeth to law with brother, and that before unbelievers?
and thou shalt return and obey the voice of jehovah, and do all his commandments which i command thee this day.
so the posts passed from city to city through the country of ephraim and manasseh, even unto zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.
for what doth it profit a man, to gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?
and when a man's uncle shall take him up, even he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is in the innermost parts of the house, is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, no; then shall he say, hold thy peace; for we may not make mention of the name of jehovah.
and jehovah passed by before him, and proclaimed, jehovah, jehovah, a god merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in lovingkindness and truth,
and when they have accomplished the days, it shall be that upon the eighth day, and forward, the priests shall make your burnt-offerings upon the altar, and your peace-offerings; and i will accept you, saith the lord jehovah.
and they journeyed from kibroth-hattaavah, and encamped in hazeroth.
and he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy assyria, and will make nineveh a desolation, and dry like the wilderness.
because they met not the children of israel with bread and with water, but hired balaam against them, to curse them: howbeit our god turned the curse into a blessing.
shallum his son, mibsam his son, mishma his son.
and the woman said unto the serpent, of the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat:
and have cast lots for my people, and have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they may drink.
for i determined not to know anything among you, save jesus christ, and him crucified.
tell me, o thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest `thy flock', where thou makest `it' to rest at noon: for why should i be as one that is veiled beside the flocks of thy companions?
but my lovingkindness shall not depart from him, as i took it from saul, whom i put away before thee.
and for the western border, ye shall have the great sea and the border `thereof': this shall be your west border.
and when the cherubim went, the wheels went beside them; and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the wheels also turned not from beside them.
wherefore, if meat causeth my brother to stumble, i will eat no flesh for evermore, that i cause not my brother to stumble.
he couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a lioness; who shall rouse him up? blessed be every one that blesseth thee, and cursed be every one that curseth thee.
and it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet spices there shall be rottenness; and instead of a girdle, a rope; and instead of well set hair, baldness; and instead of a robe, a girding of sackcloth; branding instead of beauty.
but it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they turned back, and dealt more corruptly than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their doings, nor from their stubborn way.
judah is a lion's whelp; from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as a lioness; who shall rouse him up?
well; by their unbelief they were broken off, and thou standest by thy faith. be not highminded, but fear:
and they sought to lay hold on him; and they feared the multitude; for they perceived that he spake the parable against them: and they left him, and went away.
in love of the brethren be tenderly affectioned one to another; in honor preferring one another;
and jehovah said, thou hast had regard for the gourd, for which thou hast not labored, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night:
and he said, take the arrows; and he took them. and he said unto the king of israel, smite upon the ground; and he smote thrice, and stayed.
and at what instant i shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it;
no hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, he shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.
blessed be jehovah, the god of israel, from everlasting and to everlasting. amen, and amen. psalm 42 for the chief musician. maschil of the sons of korah.
for that they exchanged the truth of god for a lie, and worshipped and served the creature rather than the creator, who is blessed for ever. amen.
now the upper chambers were shorter; for the galleries took away from these, more than from the lower and the middlemost, in the building.
doth our law judge a man, except it first hear from himself and know what he doeth?
if his master give him a wife and she bear him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself.
only, as the lord hath distributed to each man, as god hath called each, so let him walk. and so ordain i in all the churches.
and he said, what shall i give thee? and jacob said, thou shalt not give me aught: if thou wilt do this thing for me, i will again feed thy flock and keep it.
i will say of jehovah, he is my refuge and my fortress; my god, in whom i trust.
can any hide himself in secret places so that i shall not see him? saith jehovah. do not i fill heaven and earth? saith jehovah.
moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they delivered the money to give to them that did the work; for they dealt faithfully.
and the sabeans fell `upon them', and took them away: yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and i only am escaped alone to tell thee.
these are the beasts which ye may eat: the ox, the sheep, and the goat,
the heave-thigh and the wave-breast shall they bring with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave-offering before jehovah: and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, as a portion for ever; as jehovah hath commanded.
hear, o israel: jehovah our god is one jehovah:
and it came to pass at that time, that judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain adullamite, whose name was hirah.
know ye not that ye are a temple of god, and `that' the spirit of god dwelleth in you?
ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the sojourner, as for the home-born: for i am jehovah your god.
the eighth `captain' for the eighth month was sibbecai the hushathite, of the zerahites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
not to all the people, but unto witnesses that were chosen before of god, `even' to us, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
simon peter, a servant and apostle of jesus christ, to them that have obtained a like precious faith with us in the righteousness of our god and `the' saviour jesus christ:
and if we know that he heareth us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him.
and say, hear ye the word of jehovah, o kings of judah, and inhabitants of jerusalem: thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel, behold, i will bring evil upon this place, which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle.
therefore thus saith the lord jehovah: your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this `city' is the caldron; but ye shall be brought forth out of the midst of it.
and he said, hearken ye, all judah, and ye inhabitants of jerusalem, and thou king jehoshaphat: thus saith jehovah unto you, fear not ye, neither be dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but god's.
and they brought it out of the house of abinadab, which was in the hill, with the ark of god: and ahio went before the ark.
now therefore let your hands be strong, and be ye valiant; for saul your lord is dead, and also the house of judah have anointed me king over them.
as a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxed rich.
all the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full; unto the place whither the rivers go, thither they go again.
and the food of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the house of jehovah; there was no more spirit in her.
and adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fatlings by the stone of zoheleth, which is beside en-rogel; and he called all his brethren, the king's sons, and all the men of judah, the king's servants:
and he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so `abraham' begat isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and isaac `begat' jacob, and jacob the twelve patriarchs.
and moreover she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife:
now even a first `covenant' had ordinances of divine service, and its sanctuary, `a sanctuary' of this world.
and i brought you into a plentiful land, to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made my heritage an abomination.
and humtah, and kiriath-arba (the same is hebron), and zior; nine cities with their villages.
neither shall pharaoh with his mighty army and great company help him in the war, when they cast up mounds and build forts, to cut off many persons.
and jonathan spake good of david unto saul his father, and said unto him, let not the king sin against his servant, against david; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good:
and david said unto the young man that told him, whence art thou? and he answered, i am the son of a sojourner, an amalekite.
the woman also with whom a man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the even.
jehovah is on my side among them that help me: therefore shall i see `my desire' upon them that hate me.
thus saith jehovah: for three transgressions of judah, yea, for four, i will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have rejected the law of jehovah, and have not kept his statutes, and their lies have caused them to err, after which their fathers did walk:
and there arose a reasoning among them, which of them was the greatest.
then shalt thou understand the fear of jehovah, and find the knowledge of god.
faithful is he that calleth you, who will also do it.
i will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thy vaulted place, and break down thy lofty places; and they shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take thy fair jewels; and they shall leave thee naked and bare.
and the god of peace shall bruise satan under your feet shortly. the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you.
but the witness which i have is greater than `that of' john; for the works which the father hath given me to accomplish, the very works that i do, bear witness of me, that the father hath sent me.
but saul and the people spared agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but everything that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.
no longer do i call you servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but i have called you friends; for all things that i heard from my father, i have made known unto you.
so joab and abishai his brother slew abner, because he had killed their brother asahel at gibeon in the battle.
and boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, ye are witnesses this day, that i have bought all that was elimelech's, and all that was chilion's and mahlon's, of the hand of naomi.
if any man hath ears to hear, let him hear.
because thou hast plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples shall plunder thee, because of men's blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all that dwell therein.
they took jesus therefore: and he went out, bearing the cross for himself, unto the place called the place of a skull, which is called in hebrew, golgotha:
before the length of a hundred cubits was the north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits.
oh give thanks unto the god of heaven; for his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever.
(the mountains rose, the valleys sank down) unto the place which thou hadst founded for them.
behold, he putteth no trust in his servants; and his angels he chargeth with folly:
thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation; and thy gentleness hath made me great.
and let them be for lights in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.
and while he was in bethany in the house of simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster cruse of ointment of pure nard very costly; `and' she brake the cruse, and poured it over his head.
and behold, a canaanitish woman came out from those borders, and cried, saying, have mercy on me, o lord, thou son of david; my daughter is grievously vexed with a demon.
i will hiss for them, and gather them; for i have redeemed them; and they shall increase as they have increased.
let thy garments be always white; and let not thy head lack oil.
praise ye jehovah. praise god in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power.
and balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honorable than they.
and the border of the children of ephraim according to their families was `thus': the border of their inheritance eastward was ataroth-addar, unto beth-horon the upper;
in the night season my bones are pierced in me, and the `pains' that gnaw me take no rest.
and jehovah came down upon mount sinai, to the top of the mount: and jehovah called moses to the top of the mount; and moses went up.
on that night could not the king sleep; and he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles, and they were read before the king.
thus solomon finished the house of jehovah, and the king's house: and all that came into solomon's heart to make in the house of jehovah, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.
and joshua made peace with them, and made a covenant with them, to let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.
and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment.
ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes;
the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:
and jehovah said unto cain, where is abel thy brother? and he said, i know not: am i my brother's keeper?
to them that were in beth-el, and to them that were in ramoth of the south, and to them that were in jattir,
jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign; and he reigned in jerusalem three months: and his mother's name was nehushta the daughter of elnathan of jerusalem.
thrice was i beaten with rods, once was i stoned, thrice i suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have i been in the deep;
`as' clouds and wind without rain, `so is' he that boasteth himself of his gifts falsely.
so the present passed over before him: and he himself lodged that night in the company.
now after john was delivered up, jesus came into galilee, preaching the gospel of god,
in my father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, i would have told you; for i go to prepare a place for you.
who is among you that feareth jehovah, that obeyeth the voice of his servant? he that walketh in darkness, and hath no light, let him trust in the name of jehovah, and rely upon his god.
but it was thou, a man mine equal, my companion, and my familiar friend.
and it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which jehovah thy god giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein,
i will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness; and thou shalt know jehovah.
and between the chambers was a breadth of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.
make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice.
and behold, there are last who shall be first, and there are first who shall be last.
they shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for calamity; for they are the seed of the blessed of jehovah, and their offspring with them.
and ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
in the days of shamgar the son of anath, in the days of jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.
and they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of sealskin, and shall put in the staves thereof.
then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate;
shall they escape by iniquity? in anger cast down the peoples, o god.
they shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree shall be the days of my people, and my chosen shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
i will tell of the decree: jehovah said unto me, thou art my son; this day have i begotten thee.
and nobah went and took kenath, and the villages thereof, and called it nobah, after his own name.
for jehovah saw the affliction of israel, that it was very bitter; for there was none shut up nor left at large, neither was there any helper for israel.
and god blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it; because that in it he rested from all his work which god had created and made.
if a man have two wives, the one beloved, and the other hated, and they have borne him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if the first-born son be hers that was hated;
jehovah hath chastened me sore; but he hath not given me over unto death.
and they left their images there; and david and his men took them away.
come now therefore, i pray thee, curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure i shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that i may drive them out of the land; for i know that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.
again therefore jesus spake unto them, saying, i am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of life.
and we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto sihon king of heshbon, utterly destroying every inhabited city, with the women and the little ones.
and if thy oblation be a meal-offering of the frying-pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil.
praise ye jehovah. praise ye jehovah from the heavens: praise him in the heights.
and he smote moab; and the moabites became servants to david, and brought tribute.
woe unto you! for ye build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
he shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see the light.
and of the tribe of the children of ephraim a prince, kemuel the son of shiphtan.
now therefore take and prepare you a new cart, and two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke; and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them;
and they journeyed from tahath, and encamped in terah.
and they set forward from the mount of jehovah three days' journey; and the ark of the covenant of jehovah went before them three days' journey, to seek out a resting-place for them.
and there came a messenger to david, saying, the hearts of the men of israel are after absalom.
and i heard also a voice saying unto me, rise, peter; kill and eat.
now this is come to pass, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,
and he will judge between the nations, and will decide concerning many peoples; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
for thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel: behold, i will cause to cease out of this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.
all these were the sons of david, besides the sons of the concubines; and tamar was their sister.
their knops and their branches were of one piece with it: the whole of it was one beaten work of pure gold.
but they held their peace: for they had disputed one with another on the way, who `was' the greatest.
now, o king, establish the interdict, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the medes and persians, which altereth not.
then i said, surely these are poor; they are foolish; for they know not the way of jehovah, nor the law of their god:
with the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets; he shall slay thy people with the sword; and the pillars of thy strength shall go down to the ground.
this is the word which jehovah hath spoken concerning him: the virgin daughter of zion hath despised thee and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.
and he made the veil of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubim thereon.
because of the day that cometh to destroy all the philistines, to cut off from tyre and sidon every helper that remaineth: for jehovah will destroy the philistines, the remnant of the isle of caphtor.
it cannot be valued with the gold of ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.
and he sent messengers unto abimelech craftily, saying, behold, gaal the son of ebed and his brethren are come to shechem; and, behold, they constrain the city `to take part' against thee.
and they shall go in to no dead person to defile themselves; but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.
then shall there enter in by the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of david, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of judah, and the inhabitants of jerusalem; and this city shall remain for ever.
all things therefore whatsoever they bid you, `these' do and observe: but do not ye after their works; for they say, and do not.
then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the prophets: this man is not worthy of death; for he hath spoken to us in the name of jehovah our god.
what is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?
and jesus said unto them, come ye after me, and i will make you to become fishers of men.
and when the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, paul answered, forasmuch as i know that thou hast been of many years a judge unto this nation, i cheerfully make my defense:
behold, i will bring evil upon thee, and will utterly sweep thee away and will cut off from ahab every man-child, and him that is shut up and him that is left at large in israel:
he made many to stumble, yea, they fell one upon another: and they said, arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.
and he gave her his hand, and raised her up; and calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive.
and i will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called the city of righteousness, a faithful town.
and he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and wherefore do questionings arise in your heart?
know therefore this day, that jehovah thy god is he who goeth over before thee as a devouring fire; he will destroy them, and he will bring them down before thee: so shalt thou drive them out, and make them to perish quickly, as jehovah hath spoken unto thee.
and god said, let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook cherith, that is before the jordan.
i have remembered thine ordinances of old, o jehovah, and have comforted myself.
a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about, to minister in; as jehovah commanded moses.
and when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue, then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes; and he shall bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.
from the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of jonathan turned not back, and the sword of saul returned not empty.
and though they found no cause of death `in him', yet asked they of pilate that he should be slain.
for who knoweth what is good for man in `his' life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
the common people therefore of the jews learned that he was there: and they came, not for jesus' sake only, but that they might see lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.
were not the ethiopians and the lubim a huge host, with chariots and horsemen exceeding many? yet, because thou didst rely on jehovah, he delivered them into thy hand.
for the poor ye have always with you; but me ye have not always.
hurai of the brooks of gaash, abiel the arbathite,
and he saith unto the man that had his hand withered, stand forth.
and rizpah the daughter of aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water was poured upon them from heaven; and she suffered neither the birds of the heavens to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
now ye are the body of christ, and severally members thereof.
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name unto all the nations, beginning from jerusalem.
then she said, let me find favor in thy sight, my lord, for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken kindly unto thy handmaid, though i be not as one of thy handmaidens.
these are the inheritances which moses distributed in the plains of moab, beyond the jordan at jericho, eastward.
and the sons of nadab: seled, and appaim; but seled died without children.
hear this, o ye that would swallow up the needy, and cause the poor of the land to fail,
now on the morrow, which is `the day' after the preparation, the chief priests and the pharisees were gathered together unto pilate,
and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye slack to go in to possess the land, which jehovah, the god of your fathers, hath given you?
i will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, i will not return to destroy ephraim: for i am god, and not man; the holy one in the midst of thee; and i will not come in wrath.
and he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold, which solomon king of israel had made in the temple of jehovah, as jehovah had said.
and before the throne, as it were a sea of glass like a crystal; and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, four living creatures full of eyes before and behind.
and the ill-favored and lean-fleshed kine did eat up the seven well-favored and fat kine. so pharaoh awoke.
and when saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he stood in awe of him.
i will meditate also upon all thy work, and muse on thy doings.
behold now, thy servant hath found favor in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy lovingkindness, which thou hast showed unto me in saving my life; and i cannot escape to the mountain, lest evil overtake me, and i die:
and it came to pass on one of those days, that he was teaching; and there were pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, who were come out of every village of galilee and judaea and jerusalem: and the power of the lord was with him to heal.
get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the holy one of israel to cease from before us.
in the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women, to the custody of shaashgaz, the king's chamberlain, who kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no more, except the king delighted in her, and she were called by name.
they mount up to the heavens, they go down again to the depths: their soul melteth away because of trouble.
and it was that mary who anointed the lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother lazarus was sick.
for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of jehovah, as the waters cover the sea.
and thou shalt make of it incense, a perfume after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure `and' holy:
and hamor communed with them, saying, the soul of my son shechem longeth for your daughter: i pray you, give her unto him to wife.
so shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into egypt to sojourn there: they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that i will bring upon them.
the sons of merari: of jaaziah, beno, and shoham, and zaccur, and ibri.
and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, the kingdom of god is come nigh unto you.
and dost thou open thine eyes upon such a one, and bringest me into judgment with thee?
and he said, go thy way, daniel; for the words are shut up and sealed till the time of the end.
aleph. blessed are they that are perfect in the way, who walk in the law of jehovah.
and he blessed him, and said, blessed be abram of god most high, possessor of heaven and earth:
and jehoshaphat the son of asa began to reign over judah in the fourth year of ahab king of israel.
but that ye may know that the son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy),
there are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the `glory' of the terrestrial is another.
or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver:
let their eyes be darkened, so that they cannot see; and make their loins continually to shake.
but when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the ammonite, and geshem the arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, what is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the king?
and they cried with a loud voice in the jews' language unto the people of jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city.
what profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, even the teacher of lies, that he that fashioneth its form trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?
and this thing became sin unto the house of jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.
she shall be visited of jehovah of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with whirlwind and tempest, and the flame of a devouring fire.
and they said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into egypt.
and they sacrificed sacrifices unto jehovah, and offered burnt-offerings unto jehovah, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all israel,
behold, thou hast made my days `as' handbreadths; and my life-time is as nothing before thee: surely every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. selah
but peter said unto him, although all shall be offended, yet will not i.
and jeuz, and shachia, and mirmah. these were his sons, heads of fathers' `houses'.
then the lords of the philistines brought up to her seven green withes which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.
thus saith the lord jehovah: when the whole earth rejoiceth, i will make thee desolate.
and canaan begat sidon his first-born, and heth,
and it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, that his soul was vexed unto death.
and no one was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.
and it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth `month', in the fifth `day' of the month, as i sat in my house, and the elders of judah sat before me, that the hand of the lord jehovah fell there upon me.
and thy issue, that thou begettest after them, shall be thine; they shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.
thus saith the lord jehovah, woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!
howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of jehovah to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.
and she fell down immediately at his feet, and gave up the ghost: and the young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her by her husband.
for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath dealt ill with this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.
ye offspring of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
and jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to david, and his apparel, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.
and pharaoh-necoh put him in bonds at riblah in the land of hamath, that he might not reign in jerusalem; and put the land to a tribute of a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
wherefore should we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, and that the land be not desolate.
he that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.
and solomon told her all her questions; and there was not anything hid from solomon which he told her not.
come ye, `say they', i will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as this day, `a day' great beyond measure.
and after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee; and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.
hear us, my lord. thou art a prince of god among us. in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead. none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
and abimelech was prince over israel three years.
and looking up, they see that the stone is rolled back: for it was exceeding great.
for the company of the godless shall be barren, and fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
i wisdom have made prudence my dwelling, and find out knowledge `and' discretion.
and they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, who is this that even forgiveth sins?
and he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, blessed `are' ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of god.
he brought me up also out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay; and he set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.
as in water face `answereth' to face, so the heart of man to man.
if he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour soaked.
two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor.
and his sons went and held a feast in the house of each one upon his day; and they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
if the world hateth you, ye know that it hath hated me before `it hated' you.
and she called his name joseph, saying, jehovah add to me another son.
be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness.
finally, `be' ye all likeminded, compassionate, loving as brethren, tenderhearted, humbleminded:
but it shall be one day which is known unto jehovah; not day, and not night; but it shall come to pass, that at evening time there shall be light.
and when a great multitude came together, and they of every city resorted unto him, he spake by a parable:
ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin:
thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root; they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their heart.
and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put him to death; for they feared the people.
and if ye take this one also from me, and harm befall him, ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to sheol.
upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city.
and whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled; and whosoever shall humble himself shall be exalted.
and he saith unto them, let us go elsewhere into the next towns, that i may preach there also; for to this end came i forth.
`i am the' first `that saith' unto zion, behold, behold them; and i will give to jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.
shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captives be delivered?
concerning this house which thou art building, if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute mine ordinances, and keep all my commandments to walk in them; then will i establish my word with thee, which i spake unto david thy father.
again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did likewise.
and if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not do him wrong.
we certify the king that, if this city be builded, and the walls finished, by this means thou shalt have no portion beyond the river.
and the men of beth-shemesh said, who is able to stand before jehovah, this holy god? and to whom shall he go up from us?
and manoah said unto the angel of jehovah, i pray thee, let us detain thee, that we may make ready a kid for thee.
and the glory of jehovah abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of the midst of the cloud.
destroyers are come upon all the bare heights in the wilderness; for the sword of jehovah devoureth from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh hath peace.
and lo, a voice out of the heavens, saying, this is my beloved son, in whom i am well pleased.
for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
and ahab king of israel said unto jehoshaphat king of judah, wilt thou go with me to ramoth-gilead? and he answered him, i am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and `we will be' with thee in the war.
and it came to pass on the morrow, that an evil spirit from god came mightily upon saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and david played with his hand, as he did day by day. and saul had his spear in his hand;
and thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust; and thy voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.
he that speaketh from himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh the glory of him that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.
now abimelech had not come near her. and he said, lord, wilt thou slay even a righteous nation?
after them repaired benjamin and hasshub over against their house. after them repaired azariah the son of maaseiah the son of ananiah beside his own house.
they were a wall unto us both by night and by day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.
and with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of his fathers' house.
thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty; thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: i have cast thee to the ground; i have laid thee before kings, that they may behold thee.
for the king of babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he shook the arrows to and fro, he consulted the teraphim, he looked in the liver.
repent ye therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, that so there may come seasons of refreshing from the presence of the lord;
let the saints exult in glory: let them sing for joy upon their beds.
as the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets;
jehovah sat `as king' at the flood; yea, jehovah sitteth as king for ever.
for the arms of the wicked shall be broken; but jehovah upholdeth the righteous.
forsake her not, and she will preserve thee; love her, and she will keep thee.
hide not thy face from me; put not thy servant away in anger: thou hast been my help; cast me not off, neither forsake me, o god of my salvation.
and david dwelt in the stronghold, and called it the city of david. and david built round about from millo and inward.
and the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.
and the priest shall present them before jehovah, and shall offer his sin-offering, and his burnt-offering:
the children of jorah, a hundred and twelve.
and michal the daughter of saul had no child unto the day of her death.
and after him was shammah the son of agee a hararite. and the philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a plot of ground full of lentils; and the people fled from the philistines.
and the pharisees and sadducees came, and trying him asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
eliab his son, jeroham his son, elkanah his son.
for his disciples were gone away into the city to buy food.
he will send from heaven, and save me, `when' he that would swallow me up reproacheth; selah god will send forth his lovingkindness and his truth.
and they said one to another, who hath done this thing? and when they inquired and asked, they said, gideon the son of joash hath done this thing.
then wherefore gavest thou not my money into the bank, and i at my coming should have required it with interest?
and when they heard `this', they entered into the temple about daybreak, and taught. but the high priest came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of israel, and sent to the prison-house to have them brought.
thy word is very pure; therefore thy servant loveth it.
as vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.
ye say also, behold, what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith jehovah of hosts; and ye have brought that which was taken by violence, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye bring the offering: should i accept this at your hand? saith jehovah.
and those officers provided victuals for king solomon, and for all that came unto king solomon's table, every man in his month; they let nothing be lacking.
because ye have said, we have made a covenant with death, and with sheol are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves:
according to the number of years after the jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbor, `and' according unto the number of years of the crops he shall sell unto thee.
promising them liberty, while they themselves are bondservants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he also brought into bondage.
and jehovah god said, it is not good that the man should be alone; i will make him a help meet for him.
and the garment, either the warp, or the woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.
thus jehovah saved israel that day out of the hand of the egyptians; and israel saw the egyptians dead upon the sea-shore.
and the one woman said, oh, my lord, i and this woman dwell in one house; and i was delivered of a child with her in the house.
for thus saith the lord jehovah: i will also deal with thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.
and he went up from thence unto beth-el; and as he was going up by the way, there came forth young lads out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him, go up, thou baldhead; go up, thou baldhead.
as i live, saith jehovah, though coniah the son of jehoiakim king of judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would i pluck thee thence;
i was in the city of joppa praying: and in a trance i saw a vision, a certain vessel descending, as it were a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners; and it came even unto me:
nevertheless david took the stronghold of zion; the same is the city of david.
then the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world were laid bare, by the rebuke of jehovah, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.
and he said unto them, take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for i know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you.
and they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, which they have loved, and which they have served, and after which they have walked, and which they have sought, and which they have worshipped: they shall not be gathered, nor be buried, they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.
wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of jehovah, vaheb in suphah, and the valleys of the arnon,
and thou shalt write them upon the door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates;
even thou, o jehovah god of hosts, the god of israel, arise to visit all the nations: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. selah
the sons of naphtali after their families: of jahzeel, the family of the jahzeelites; of guni, the family of the gunites;
and the king said unto esther at the banquet of wine, what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.
i said, i will climb up into the palm-tree, i will take hold of the branches thereof: let thy breasts be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy breath like apples,
but now he is dead, wherefore should i fast? can i bring him back again? i shall go to him, but he will not return to me.
and she went down unto the threshing-floor, and did according to all that her mother-in-law bade her.
and the second took her, and died, leaving no seed behind him; and the third likewise:
open thou mine eyes, that i may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
and if a man prevail against him that is alone, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.
because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other gods, that they knew not, they and their fathers and the kings of judah; and have filled this place with the blood of innocents,
through thee will we push down our adversaries: through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us.
do ye thus requite jehovah, o foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee? he hath made thee, and established thee.
then the king promoted shadrach, meshach, and abed-nego in the province of babylon.
and the host was given over `to it' together with the continual `burnt-offering' through transgression; and it cast down truth to the ground, and it did `its pleasure' and prospered.
hear then ye the parable of the sower.
for thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.
cut off the sower from babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own land.
and he carried away all jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths; none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land.
simon peter saith unto them, i go a fishing. they say unto him, we also come with thee. they went forth, and entered into the boat; and that night they took nothing.
so rabshakeh returned, and found the king of assyria warring against libnah; for he had heard that he was departed from lachish.
and his affection is more abundantly toward you, while he remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him.
the word which came to jeremiah from jehovah, saying,
and it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, that he took with him peter and john and james, and went up into the mountain to pray.
but put ye on the lord jesus christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to `fulfil' the lusts `thereof'.
the fifth to nethaniah, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
knowing that christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death no more hath dominion over him.
suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that is was an error: wherefore should god be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands?
and behold, there came a man named jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and he fell down at jesus' feet, and besought him to come into his house;
but if any man is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
and when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as their uncircumcision: three years shall they be as uncircumcised unto you; it shall not be eaten.
they have made it a desolation; it mourneth unto me, being desolate; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart.
the waste city is broken down; every house is shut up, that no man may come in.
wherein i suffer hardship unto bonds, as a malefactor; but the word of god is not bound.
then zedekiah the son of chenaanah came near, and smote micaiah on the cheek, and said, which way went the spirit of jehovah from me to speak unto thee?
saying, surely blessing i will bless thee, and multiplying i will multiply thee.
avoiding this, that any man should blame us in `the matter of' this bounty which is ministered by us:
he hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces; he hath made me desolate.
and it came to pass, when jehovah would take up elijah by a whirlwind into heaven, that elijah went with elisha from gilgal.
the tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth;
and shaaraim, and adithaim, and gederah, and gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages.
and i have given the levites as a gift to aaron and to his sons from among the children of israel, to do the service of the children of israel in the tent of meeting, and to make atonement for the children of israel; that there be no plague among the children of israel, when the children of israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.
and david said, i will show kindness unto hanun the son of nahash, because his father showed kindness to me. so david sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. and david's servants came into the land of the children of ammon to hanun, to comfort him.
for everything there is a season, and a time for very purpose under heaven:
yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto demons,
and when they had sung a hymn, they went out unto the mount of olives.
ye call me, teacher, and, lord: and ye say well; for so i am.
i said, i shall not see jehovah, `even' jehovah in the land of the living: i shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
and he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleannesses of the children of israel.
and if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him: but if not, it shall turn to you again.
thou holdest mine eyes watching: i am so troubled that i cannot speak.
she hath done what she could; she hath anointed my body beforehand for the burying.
then pharaoh called for moses and aaron in haste; and he said, i have sinned against jehovah your god, and against you.
he smote the philistines unto gaza and the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city.
but now hath god set the members each one of them in the body, even as it pleased him.
then will he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure:
and the lord direct your hearts into the love of god, and into the patience of christ.
and aaron said unto moses, oh, my lord, lay not, i pray thee, sin upon us, for that we have done foolishly, and for that we have sinned.
so when they got out upon the land, they see a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.
and the light of a lamp shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the princes of the earth; for with thy sorcery were all the nations deceived.
he hath torn me in his wrath, and persecuted me; he hath gnashed upon me with his teeth: mine adversary sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
and we bring you good tidings of the promise made unto the fathers,
blessed be jehovah, that hath given rest unto his people israel, according to all that he promised: there hath not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by moses his servant.
and it came to pass, when the king of ai saw it, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against israel to battle, he and all his people, at the time appointed, before the arabah; but he knew not that there was an ambush against him behind the city.
and he made the porch of the throne where he was to judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from floor to floor.
let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them: have i not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the young men have drawn.
then said i, i will not feed you: that which dieth, let it die; and that which is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let them that are left eat every one the flesh of another.
thus saith jehovah: yet again there shall be heard in this place, whereof ye say, it is waste, without man and without beast, even in the cities of judah, and in the streets of jerusalem, that are desolate, without man and without inhabitant and without beast,
woe is me! for i am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat; my soul desireth the first-ripe fig.
and i saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
and their border on the north quarter was from the jordan; and the border went up to the side of jericho on the north, and went up through the hill-country westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of beth-aven.
for the nineteenth to mallothi, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
and he called the twelve together, and gave them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.
far above all rule, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:
on the second day nethanel the son of zuar, prince of issachar, did offer:
and suddenly looking round about, they saw no one any more, save jesus only with themselves.
for every high priest, being taken from among men, is appointed for men in things pertaining to god, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins:
joel the brother of nathan, mibhar the son of hagri,
and jehovah uttereth his voice before his army; for his camp is very great; for he is strong that executeth his word; for the day of jehovah is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?
now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens `laid' upon him, and the rebuilding of the house of god, behold, they are written in the commentary of the book of the kings. and amaziah his son reigned in his stead.
and he took the mantle of elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, where is jehovah, the god of elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they were divided hither and thither; and elisha went over.
the blessing, if ye shall hearken unto the commandments of jehovah your god, which i command you this day;
now israel loved joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colors.
so samuel brought all the tribes of israel near, and the tribe of benjamin was taken.
and david waxed greater and greater; for jehovah, the god of hosts, was with him.
but we were gentle in the midst of you, as when a nurse cherisheth her own children:
thou hast broken rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou hast scattered thine enemies with the arm of thy strength.
there is elam and all her multitude round about her grave; all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, who caused their terror in the land of the living, and have borne their shame with them that go down to the pit.
and see; if it goeth up by the way of its own border to beth-shemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a chance that happened to us.
and the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fortified cities and of country villages, even unto the great stone, whereon they set down the ark of jehovah, `which stone remaineth' unto this day in the field of joshua the beth-shemite.
and behold, two of them were going that very day to a village named emmaus, which was threescore furlongs from jerusalem.
and the king of assyria sent rabshakeh from lachish to jerusalem unto king hezekiah with a great army. and he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.
mine enemies would swallow me up all the day long; for they are many that fight proudly against me.
but they did not all hearken to the glad tidings. for isaiah saith, lord, who hath believed our report?
and when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to jehovah, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land: but no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
or know ye not that he that is joined to a harlot is one body? for, the twain, saith he, shall become one flesh.
and i will come upon him while he is weary and weak-handed, and will make him afraid; and all the people that are with him shall flee; and i will smite the king only;
and the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break its neck. all the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. and none shall appear before me empty.
they break in pieces thy people, o jehovah, and afflict thy heritage.
and when his disciples heard `thereof', they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
and when he had said this, one of the officers standing by struck jesus with his hand, saying, answerest thou the high priest so?
and he will say, cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling-block out of the way of my people.
of the tribe of benjamin, elidad the son of chislon.
and when she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, she left off speaking unto her.
and i will write on the tables the words that were on the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.
he that loveth not knoweth not god; for god is love.
then the nations that are left round about you shall know that i, jehovah, have builded the ruined places, and planted that which was desolate: i, jehovah, have spoken it, and i will do it.
one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end: of one piece with the mercy-seat made he the cherubim at the two ends thereof.
treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but righteousness delivereth from death.
and taking the child by the hand, he saith unto her, talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, damsel, i say unto thee, arise.
i have found david my servant; with my holy oil have i anointed him:
king solomon made himself a palanquin of the wood of lebanon.
three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the lord jehovah, the god of israel.
remember the word that i said unto you, a servant is not greater than his lord. if they persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they kept my word, they will keep yours also.
for thus saith jehovah, behold, i will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends; and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it; and i will give all judah into the hand of the king of babylon, and he shall carry them captive to babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.
then daniel returned answer with counsel and prudence to arioch the captain of the king's guard, who was gone forth to slay the wise men of babylon;
now the philistines had come and made a raid in the valley of rephaim.
the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way; but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.
and if the household be too little for a lamb, then shall he and his neighbor next unto his house take one according to the number of the souls; according to every man's eating ye shall make your count for the lamb.
show thy marvellous lovingkindness, o thou that savest by thy right hand them that take refuge `in thee 'from those that rise up `against them'.
wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
for in the days of david and asaph of old there was a chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto god.
the voice of jehovah is upon the waters: the god of glory thundereth, even jehovah upon many waters.
and the day began to wear away; and the twelve came, and said unto him, send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages and country round about, and lodge, and get provisions: for we are here in a desert place.
they that are slain with the sword are better than they that are slain with hunger; for these pine away, stricken through, for want of the fruits of the field.
i exhort euodia, and i exhort syntyche, to be of the same mind in the lord.
then will i teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be converted unto thee.
the family of the house of levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of the shimeites apart, and their wives apart;
he that is soon angry will deal foolishly; and a man of wicked devices is hated.
yea, they that eat of his dainties shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow; and many shall fall down slain.
either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by its fruit.
in famine he will redeem thee from death; and in war from the power of the sword.
and the fame hereof went forth into all that land.
`him' that removeth the mountains, and they know it not, when he overturneth them in his anger;
but the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of the man, passeth through waterless places, seeking rest, and findeth it not.
wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? i had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me.
jehovah is a jealous god and avengeth; jehovah avengeth and is full of wrath; jehovah taketh vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth `wrath' for his enemies.
and simon he surnamed peter;
the legs of the lame hang loose: so is a parable in the mouth of fools.
for whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day; he shall be cut off from his people.
and joseph said unto his brethren, i die; but god will surely visit you, and bring you up out of this land unto the land which he sware to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.
say now to the rebellious house, know ye not what these things mean? tell them, behold, the king of babylon came to jerusalem, and took the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and brought them to him to babylon:
and among the sons of the priests there were found that had married foreign women: `namely', of the sons of jeshua, the son of jozadak, and his brethren, maaseiah, and eliezer, and jarib, and gedaliah.
know therefore this day, and lay it to thy heart, that jehovah he is god in heaven above and upon the earth beneath; there is none else.
teach me good judgment and knowledge; for i have believed in thy commandments.
and men shall dwell therein, and there shall be no more curse; but jerusalem shall dwell safely.
thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces; thou gavest him to be food to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
and take with thee ten loaves, and cakes, and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he will tell thee what shall become of the child.
set forward zenas the lawyer and apollos on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them.
wherewith shall i come before jehovah, and bow myself before the high god? shall i come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves a year old?
grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
and the sons of gomer: ashkenaz, and diphath, and togarmah.
shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to trespass against our god in marrying foreign women?
some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was in confusion; and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.
thou shalt not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small.
who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the birds of the heavens?
and they entered in, and found not the body of the lord jesus.
having then a great high priest, who hath passed through the heavens, jesus the son of god, let us hold fast our confession.
thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.
and now, i pray you, consider from this day and backward, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of jehovah.
but if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.
jehovah, in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer `when' thy chastening was upon them.
and the priest shall look on him again the seventh day; and, behold, if the plague be dim, and the plague be not spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is a scab: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
now a certain man was sick, lazarus of bethany, of the village of mary and her sister martha.
brethren and fathers, hear ye the defence which i now make unto you.
i have heard the reproach of moab, and the revilings of the children of ammon, wherewith they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.
and they made the coats of fine linen of woven work for aaron, and for his sons,
and abigail came to nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.
when the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto joseph, i also was in my dream, and, behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head:
whosoever is begotten of god doeth no sin, because his seed abideth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is begotten of god.
ye have wearied jehovah with your words. yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him? in that ye say, every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of jehovah, and he delighteth in them; or where is the god of justice?
but gehazi the servant of elisha the man of god, said, behold, my master hath spared this naaman the syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought: as jehovah liveth, i will run after him, and take somewhat of him.
i am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children.
now the passover, the feast of the jews, was at hand.
and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it with fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, and made the children of israel drink of it.
in the first day shall be a holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work;
to the end that ye should walk worthily of god, who calleth you into his own kingdom and glory.
if the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth; and if a tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there shall it be.
in all your dwelling-places the cities shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your sun-images may be hewn down, and your works may be abolished.
and he said, wherefore doth my lord pursue after his servant? for what have i done? or what evil is in my hand?
the word which he sent unto the children of israel, preaching good tidings of peace by jesus christ (he is lord of all.) --
now the king of syria was warring against israel; and he took counsel with his servants, saying, in such and such a place shall be my camp.
therefore said i, look away from me, i will weep bitterly; labor not to comfort me for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old: this was the oblation of pagiel the son of ochran.
and jehovah spake unto moses in mount sinai, saying,
to change the face of the matter hath thy servant joab done this thing: and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of god, to know all things that are in the earth.
also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them will jehovah bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
therefore as the tongue of fire devoureth the stubble, and as the dry grass sinketh down in the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have rejected the law of jehovah of hosts, and despised the word of the holy one of israel.
this is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of israel for inheritance, and these are their several portions, saith the lord jehovah.
and micah consecrated the levite, and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of micah.
for the bread of god is that which cometh down out of heaven, and giveth life unto the world.
thou hast covered with anger and pursued us; thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied.
yet will i make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.
mine eye wasteth away by reason of affliction: i have called daily upon thee, o jehovah; i have spread forth my hands unto thee.
i will observe thy statutes: oh forsake me not utterly.
for, behold, i have made thee this day a fortified city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls, against the whole land, against the kings of judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.
then ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that were in mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people that remained in mizpah, whom nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had committed to gedaliah the son of ahikam; ishmael the son of nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the children of ammon.
hear ye this word which i take up for a lamentation over you, o house of israel.
and the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.
but thus saith jehovah, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for i will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and i will save thy children.
for the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life:
for moses had given the inheritance of the two tribes and the half-tribe beyond the jordan: but unto the levites he gave no inheritance among them.
speak not in the hearing of a fool; for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.
that ye also be in subjection unto such, and to every one that helpeth in the work and laboreth.
jehovah hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of zion; he hath stretched out the line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying; and he hath made the rampart and wall to lament; they languish together.
will i eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
and as i was considering, behold, a he-goat came from the west over the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.
as i live, saith the lord jehovah, surely with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out, will i be king over you:
the words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts.
from the wicked that oppress me, my deadly enemies, that compass me about.
many are my persecutors and mine adversaries; `yet' have i not swerved from thy testimonies.
thinkest thou this to be `thy' right, `or' sayest thou, my righteousness is more than god's,
and there fell of benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these `were' men of valor.
`they are' dead, they shall not live; `they are' deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all remembrance of them to perish.
and he began to speak unto them in parables. a man planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged a pit for the winepress, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into another country.
and the soldiers led him away within the court, which is the praetorium; and they call together the whole band.
hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old; and he reigned nine and twenty years in jerusalem: and his mother's name was abijah, the daughter of zechariah.
blessed be jehovah thy god, who delighted in thee, to set thee on his throne, to be king for jehovah thy god: because thy god loved israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do justice and righteousness.
wherefore also there sprang of one, and him as good as dead, `so many' as the stars of heaven in multitude, and as the sand, which is by the sea-shore, innumerable.
that in blessing i will bless thee, and in multiplying i will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand which is upon the seashore. and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies.
and it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of jehovah thy god, to observe to do all his commandments which i command thee this day, that jehovah thy god will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth:
and if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give unto the priest the holy thing.
offer unto god the sacrifice of thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most high:
and they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings `thus':
and they, when they heard it, glorified god; and they said unto him, thou seest, brother, how many thousands there are among the jews of them that have believed; and they are all zealous for the law:
what is it then, brethren? when ye come together, each one hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a revelation, hath a tongue, hath an interpretation. let all things be done unto edifying.
the grass withereth, the flower fadeth, because the breath of jehovah bloweth upon it; surely the people is grass.
and i will give grass in thy fields for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be full.
let heavier work be laid upon the men, that they may labor therein; and let them not regard lying words.
thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;
the heavens declare his righteousness, and all the peoples have seen his glory.
let them be put to shame `and' consumed that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered with reproach and dishonor that seek my hurt.
the father loveth the son, and hath given all things into his hand.
and he said unto them, thus and thus hath micah dealt with me, and he hath hired me, and i am become his priest.
and they said unto joshua, we are thy servants. and joshua said unto them, who are ye? and from whence come ye?
and the king of babylon smote them, and put them to death at riblah in the land of hamath. so judah was carried away captive out of his land.
and when the children of ammon saw that they were become odious to david, the children of ammon sent and hired the syrians of beth-rehob, and the syrians of zobah, twenty thousand footmen, and the king of maacah with a thousand men, and the men of tob twelve thousand men.
a bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.
and david said unto saul, who am i, and what is my life, `or' my father's family in israel, that i should be son-in-law to the king?
and i perceived that the portions of the levites had not been given them; so that the levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field.
behold, i have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness.
the ninth to mattaniah, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
and his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, my father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, wash, and be clean?
thus saith jehovah, ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of israel: return every man to his house; for this thing is of me. so they hearkened unto the word of jehovah, and returned and went their way, according to the word of jehovah.
and isaac sent away jacob. and he went to paddan-aram unto laban, son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob's and esau's mother.
as it is written, he hath scattered abroad, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness abideth for ever.
thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel: add your burnt-offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat ye flesh.
if they return unto thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captive, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which i have built for thy name:
if ye are reproached for the name of christ, blessed `are ye'; because the `spirit' of glory and the spirit of god resteth upon you.
and they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread, which thou shalt receive of their hand.
she riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth food to her household, and their task to her maidens.
then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy healing shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of jehovah shall by thy rearward.
and they went in unto her, as they go in unto a harlot: so went they in unto oholah and unto oholibah, the lewd women.
and they returned, and prepared spices and ointments. and on the sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
and when they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified god, saying, then to the gentiles also hath god granted repentance unto life.
and jesus answered and said unto him, it is written, thou shalt worship the lord thy god, and him only shalt thou serve.
and they did so, and made them all sit down.
i am jehovah your god, who brought you out of the land of egypt, to be your god: i am jehovah your god.
for from israel is even this; the workman made it, and it is no god; yea, the calf of samaria shall be broken in pieces.
and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed.
then jacob was greatly afraid and was distressed: and he divided the people that were with him, and the flocks, and the herds, and the camels, into two companies;
and as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto them, why loose ye the colt?
there is a generation whose teeth are `as' swords, and their jaw teeth `as' knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.
and jehovah spake unto aaron, and i, behold, i have given thee the charge of my heave-offerings, even all the hallowed things of the children of israel; unto thee have i given them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, as a portion for ever.
harden not your heart, as at meribah, as in the day of massah in the wilderness;
and answerable unto the border of the priests, the levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: all the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.
and `yet' count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
ye have compassed this mountain long enough: turn you northward.
thou shalt speak all that i command thee; and aaron thy brother shall speak unto pharaoh, that he let the children of israel go out of his land.
and whosoever will not do the law of thy god, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed upon him with all diligence, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.
rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets that were before you.
wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, o backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, `saying', who shall come unto me?
with his mouth the godless man destroyeth his neighbor; but through knowledge shall the righteous be delivered.
which jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of judah, and to all the inhabitants of jerusalem, saying:
if thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food:
a wicked messenger falleth into evil; but a faithful ambassador is health.
and we desire that each one of you may show the same diligence unto the fulness of hope even to the end:
and the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and benjamin; and rose up, and went down to egypt, and stood before joseph.
and when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their heart, he saith unto the man, stretch forth thy hand. and he stretched it forth; and his hand was restored.
he hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities.
we give thanks to god always for you all, making mention `of you' in our prayers;
but now, because he hath not visited in his anger, neither doth he greatly regard arrogance;
for jehovah's portion is his people; jacob is the lot of his inheritance.
and the third took her; and likewise the seven also left no children, and died.
for mine iniquities are gone over my head: as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.
i am a brother to jackals, and a companion to ostriches.
therefore, as through one man sin entered into the world, and death through sin; and so death passed unto all men, for that all sinned:--
rejoice, o ye nations, `with' his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will make expiation for his land, for his people.
for i say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, blessed `is' he that cometh in the name of the lord.
and amaziah took courage, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of seir ten thousand.
in his hand are the deep places of the earth; the heights of the mountains are his also.
the high mountains are for the wild goats; the rocks are a refuge for the conies.
and saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father's house.
jesus answered him, if i have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?
howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters, for the children of israel had sworn, saying, cursed be he that giveth a wife to benjamin.
that they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws. praise ye jehovah.
and when he had seen the vision, straightway we sought to go forth into macedonia, concluding that god had called us to preach the gospel to them.
the staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.
let his days be few; `and' let another take his office.
thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of egypt in haste: that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of egypt all the days of thy life.
if fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the shocks of grain, or the standing grain, or the field are consumed; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
for he that lacketh these things is blind, seeing only what is near, having forgotten the cleansing from his old sins.
and after that shall the levites go in to do the service of the tent of meeting: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them for a wave-offering.
and he that regarded not the word of jehovah left his servants and his cattle in the field.
and he came near, and kissed him. and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which jehovah hath blessed.
they that fashion a graven image are all of them vanity; and the things that they delight in shall not profit; and their own witnesses see not, nor know: that they may be put to shame.
behold, i have allotted unto you these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from the jordan, with all the nations that i have cut off, even unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun.
but he denied, saying, i neither know, nor understand what thou sayest: and he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.
and thou shalt take no bribe: for a bribe blindeth them that have sight, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
for a small moment have i forsaken thee; but with great mercies will i gather thee.
forbidding us to speak to the gentiles that they may be saved; to fill up their sins always: but the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.
he that opposeth and exalteth himself against all that is called god or that is worshipped; so that he sitteth in the temple of god, setting himself forth as god.
and the spirit of jehovah began to move him in mahaneh-dan, between zorah and eshtaol.
even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall:
for, all flesh is as grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of grass. the grass withereth, and the flower falleth:
and he spake unto the children of israel, saying, when your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what mean these stones?
and take ye every man his censer, and put incense upon them, and bring ye before jehovah every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and aaron, each his censer.
in the fear of jehovah is strong confidence; and his children shall have a place of refuge.
and even he that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt; for all israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they that are with him are valiant men.
and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters as captives of the sword?
set a watch, o jehovah, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
and on the sabbath day two he-lambs a year old without blemish, and two tenth parts `of an ephah' of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, and the drink-offering thereof:
thus he said, the fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.
and jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
the simple inherit folly; but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
the kings of the earth set themselves in array, and the rulers were gathered together, against the lord, and against his anointed:
salt therefore is good: but if even the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned?
the sons of judah: er, and onan, and shelah; which three were born unto him of shua's daughter the canaanitess. and er, judah's first-born, was wicked in the sight of jehovah; and he slew him.
and ye shall rejoice before jehovah your god, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and the levite that is within your gates, forasmuch as he hath no portion nor inheritance with you.
for from the top of the rocks i see him, and from the hills i behold him: lo, it is a people that dwelleth alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.
and god said unto noah, the end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, i will destroy them with the earth.
and unto the children of levi, behold, i have given all the tithe in israel for an inheritance, in return for their service which they serve, even the service of the tent of meeting.
and there come near unto him james and john, the sons of zebedee, saying unto him, teacher, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall ask of thee.
so abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of david; and asa his son reigned in his stead. in his days the land was quiet ten years.
that path no bird of prey knoweth, neither hath the falcon's eye seen it:
and they said unto him, hold thy peace, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it better for thee to be priest unto the house of one man, or to be priest unto a tribe and a family in israel?
and the sergeants reported these words unto the magistrates: and they feared when they heard that they were romans;
the preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was written uprightly, `even' words of truth.
and when he saw that it pleased the jews, he proceeded to seize peter also. and `those' were the days of unleavened bread.
and, thou, lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands:
he will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry and will save them.
he shall not defile himself, `being' a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots `shall be' as the whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. woe unto us! for we are ruined.
and it came to pass, when the king heard the saying of the man of god, which he cried against the altar in beth-el, that jeroboam put forth his hand from the altar, saying, lay hold on him. and his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not draw it back again to him.
and joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after israel; for joab held back the people.
for this cause also the multitude went and met him, for that they heard that he had done this sign.
and it shall come to pass in that day, that there shall not be light; the bright ones shall withdraw themselves:
but, o jehovah of hosts, who judgest righteously, who triest the heart and the mind, i shall see thy vengeance on them; for unto thee have i revealed my cause.
but samson's wife was `given' to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.
hear ye therefore the word of jehovah, all ye of the captivity, whom i have sent away from jerusalem to babylon.
and i will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover; for they are a rebellious house.
thou shalt sell me food for money, that i may eat; and give me water for money, that i may drink: only let me pass through on my feet,
and the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did according to the word of memucan:
and in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that have been slain upon the earth.
and he went forth to tarsus to seek for saul;
now the rest of the acts of jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered damascus, and hamath, `which had belonged' to judah, for israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
in the second year of pekah the son of remaliah king of israel began jotham the son of uzziah king of judah to reign.
he that hath received his witness hath set his seal to `this', that god is true.
ye daughters of israel, weep over saul, who clothed you in scarlet delicately, who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel.
therefore my heart soundeth for moab like pipes, and my heart soundeth like pipes for the men of kir-heres: therefore the abundance that he hath gotten is perished.
now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their possessions in their cities were israel, the priests, the levites, and the nethinim.
wherefore also it was reckoned unto him for righteousness.
so hilkiah the priest, and ahikam, and achbor, and shaphan, and asaiah, went unto huldah the prophetess, the wife of shallum the son of tikvah, the son of harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (now she dwelt in jerusalem in the second quarter); and they communed with her.
because they turned aside from following him, and would not have regard in any of his ways:
azmaveth the baharumite, eliahba the shaalbonite,
the young man saith unto him, all these things have i observed: what lack i yet?
and he sent messengers to ahab king of israel, into the city, and said unto him, thus saith ben-hadad,
and hezekiah prayed before jehovah, and said, o jehovah, the god of israel, that sittest `above' the cherubim, thou art the god, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven and earth.
and thou shalt say, thus saith the lord jehovah: a city that sheddeth blood in the midst of her, that her time may come, and that maketh idols against herself to defile her!
for as the lightning, when it lighteneth out of the one part under the heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall the son of man be in his day.
were there none found that returned to give glory to god, save this stranger?
this is the law when a man dieth in a tent: every one that cometh into the tent, and every one that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
and jacob fled into the field of aram, and israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept `sheep'.
for thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: this hast thou said truly.
while he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house;
he turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the innocent poor: thou didst not find them breaking in; but it is because of all these things.
but absalom fled. and the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hill-side behind him.
by reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wagons, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.
and abraham hastened into the tent unto sarah, and said, make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes.
and he shall offer of the sacrifice of peace-offerings an offering made by fire unto jehovah; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
praise jehovah, o jerusalem; praise thy god, o zion.
blessed is the man to whom, the lord will not reckon sin.
and i said unto the angel that talked with me, what are these? and he answered me, these are the horns which have scattered judah, israel, and jerusalem.
and the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be as the first-ripe fig before the summer; which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.
if thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that i shall teach them, their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.
flee for safety, ye children of benjamin, out of the midst of jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in tekoa, and raise up a signal on beth-haccherem; for evil looketh forth from the north, and a great destruction.
the mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks are seven churches.
how is the city of praise not forsaken, the city of my joy?
these are the sons of benjamin after their families; and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred.
and before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;
yea, the hind also in the field calveth, and forsaketh `her young', because there is no grass.
and `other' ten thousand did the children of judah carry away alive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, so that they all were broken in pieces.
and the anointed priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons shall offer it: by a statute for ever it shall be wholly burnt unto jehovah.
and unto joseph in the land of egypt were born manasseh and ephraim, whom asenath, the daughter of poti-phera priest of on, bare unto him.
but hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon judah and jerusalem.
and i will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will slay all the princes thereof with him, saith jehovah.
and it came to pass from that time forth, that half of my servants wrought in the work, and half of them held the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the coats of mail; and the rulers were behind all the house of judah.
when the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die therein.
but all israel and judah loved david; for he went out and came in before them.
although there is no violence in my hands, and my prayer is pure.
the voice of tidings, behold, it cometh, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of judah a desolation, a dwelling-place of jackals.
look unto abraham your father, and unto sarah that bare you; for when he was but one i called him, and i blessed him, and made him many.
for thou hast made of a city a heap, of a fortified city a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.
how shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by jehovah that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?
and mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the jews that were in all the provinces of the king ahasuerus, both nigh and far,
and the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the children of israel, and they shall be forgiven; for it was an error, and they have brought their oblation, an offering made by fire unto jehovah, and their sin-offering before jehovah, for their error:
that they gathered themselves together, to fight with joshua and with israel, with one accord.
and pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and i took the grapes, and pressed them into pharaoh's cup, and i gave the cup into pharaoh's hand.
and when she knew peter's voice, she opened not the gate for joy, but ran in, and told that peter stood before the gate.
there shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off; it shall devour thee like the canker-worm: make thyself many as the canker-worm; make thyself many as the locust.
but this he said, signifying by what manner of death he should die.
for as the woman is of the man, so is the man also by the woman; but all things are of god.
he that deviseth to do evil, men shall call him a mischief-maker.
then he said unto me, son of man, these bones are the whole house of israel: behold, they say, our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost; we are clean cut off.
ye therefore shall keep my statutes and mine ordinances, and shall not do any of these abominations; neither the home-born, nor the stranger that sojourneth among you;
and shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brethren had not many children, neither did all their family multiply like to the children of judah.
the holy spirit this signifying, that the way into the holy place hath not yet been made manifest, while the first tabernacle is yet standing;
ye foolish ones, did not he that made the outside make the inside also?
and they journeyed from iyim, and encamped in dibon-gad.
to keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the foreigner's tongue.
for we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.
then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain until now, but some are fallen asleep;
and when he defied israel, jonathan the son of shimei, david's brother, slew him.
seven days thou shalt make atonement for the altar, and sanctify it: and the altar shall be most holy; whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.
lo, we heard of it in ephrathah: we found it in the field of the wood.
and these are the generations of isaac, abraham's son. abraham begat isaac.
and it came to pass after this, that there was again war with the philistines at gob: then sibbecai the hushathite slew saph, who was of the sons of the giant.
on the south; all the land of the canaanites, and mearah that belongeth to the sidonians, unto aphek, to the border of the amorites;
and `whatsoever is' for the prince `shall be' on the one side and on the other side of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city, in front of the holy oblation and in front of the possession of the city, on the west side westward, and on the east side eastward; and in length answerable unto one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border.
and all the earth sought the presence of solomon, to hear his wisdom, which god had put in his heart.
and when the thousand years are finished, satan shall be loosed out of his prison,
if they do that which is evil in my sight, that they obey not my voice, then i will repent of the good, wherewith i said i would benefit them.
for our soul is bowed down to the dust: our body cleaveth unto the earth.
for the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law.
how then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
neither went i up to jerusalem to them that were apostles before me: but i went away into arabia; and again i returned unto damascus.
and they went up to the city; `and' as they came within the city, behold, samuel came out toward them, to go up to the high place.
and he was an adversary to israel all the days of solomon, besides the mischief that hadad `did': and he abhorred israel, and reigned over syria.
behold now, i have set my cause in order; i know that i am righteous.
incline thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart unto my knowledge.
hear, o my people, and i will testify unto thee: o israel, if thou wouldest hearken unto me!
but our god is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he pleased.
he and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought in to destroy the land; and they shall draw their swords against egypt, and fill the land with the slain.
for the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, thou hast broken as in the day of midian.
but jesus took him by the hand, and raised him up; and he arose.
and seeing peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and saith, thou also wast with the nazarene, `even' jesus.
for he is not a jew who is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh:
but they were the more urgent, saying, he stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all judaea, and beginning from galilee even unto this place.
but the wicked are like the troubled sea; for it cannot rest, and its waters cast up mire and dirt.
and the grace of our lord abounded exceedingly with faith and love which is in christ jesus.
now a mediator is not `a mediator' of one; but god is one.
for thou meetest him with the blessings of goodness: thou settest a crown of fine gold on his head.
and jacob set up a pillar upon her grave: the same is the pillar of rachel's grave unto this day.
lo, their prosperity is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
but ye have this day rejected your god, who himself saveth you out of all your calamities and your distresses; and ye have said unto him, `nay', but set a king over us. now therefore present yourselves before jehovah by your tribes, and by your thousands.
and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee will israel bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set ephraim before manasseh.
the elders of the daughter of zion sit upon the ground, they keep silence; they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
and he said unto him, teacher, all these things have i observed from my youth.
the sons of manasseh: asriel, whom his concubine the aramitess bare: she bare machir the father of gilead:
are we beginning again to commend ourselves? or need we, as do some, epistles of commendation to you or from you?
but the people held their peace, and answered him not a word; for the king's commandment was, saying, answer him not.
to proclaim the acceptable year of the lord.
and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jaspar: they were inclosed in inclosings of gold in their settings.
so it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto shushan the palace, to the custody of hegai, that esther was taken into the king's house, to the custody of hegai, keeper of the women.
he spake unto them in the pillar of cloud: they kept his testimonies, and the statute that he gave them.
and he was king in jeshurun, when the heads of the people were gathered, all the tribes of israel together.
and elisha said unto him, take bow and arrows; and he took unto him bow and arrows.
and king rehoboam took counsel with the old men, that had stood before solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, what counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?
the fear of jehovah is clean, enduring for ever: the ordinances of jehovah are true, `and' righteous altogether.
and joseph said unto his brethren, i am joseph; doth my father yet live? and his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.
even those did cyrus king of persia bring forth by the hand of mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto sheshbazzar, the prince of judah.
but when the fulness of the time came, god sent forth his son, born of a woman, born under the law,
how long shall i see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet?
and there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have polluted yourselves; and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.
then david sent home to tamar, saying, go now to thy brother amnon's house, and dress him food.
of the tribe of dan, ammiel the son of gemalli.
judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish, they sit in black upon the ground; and the cry of jerusalem is gone up.
and the king of sodom said unto abram, give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.
in the prophets of jerusalem also i have seen a horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies; and they strengthen the hands of evil-doers, so that none doth return from his wickedness: they are all of them become unto me as sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as gomorrah.
then saith jesus unto them, all ye shall be offended in me this night: for it is written, i will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
and he said, behold, i make a covenant: before all thy people i will do marvels, such as have not been wrought in all the earth, nor in any nation; and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of jehovah; for it is a terrible thing that i do with thee.
wherein they think strange that ye run not with `them' into the same excess of riot, speaking evil of `of':
and jehoash the son of jehoahaz took again out of the hand of benhadad the son of hazael the cities which he had taken out of the hand of jehoahaz his father by war. three times did joash smite him, and recovered the cities of israel.
and they shall deal with thee in hatred, and shall take away all thy labor, and shall leave thee naked and bare; and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be uncovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
thus saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel, concerning ahab the son of kolaiah, and concerning zedekiah the son of maaseiah, who prophesy a lie unto you in my name: behold, i will deliver them into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes;
for wisdom is a defence, even as money is a defence; but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom preserveth the life of him that hath it.
my soul refuseth to touch `them'; they are as loathsome food to me.
and they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.
his prayer also, and how `god' was entreated of him, and all his sin and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up the asherim and the graven images, before he humbled himself: behold, they are written in the history of hozai.
and he said, a hundred measures of oil. and he said unto him, take thy bond, and sit down quickly and write fifty.
and at evening let them return, let them howl like a dog, and go round about the city.
blessed `is' the kingdom that cometh, `the kingdom' of our father david: hosanna in the highest.
and absalom chanced to meet the servants of david. and absalom was riding upon his mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between heaven and earth; and the mule that was under him went on.
with him the reubenites and the gadites received their inheritance, which moses gave them, beyond the jordan eastward, even as moses the servant of jehovah gave them:
at the commandment of jehovah they encamped, and at the commandment of jehovah they journeyed: they kept the charge of jehovah, at the commandment of jehovah by moses.
i am the door; by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and go out, and shall find pasture.
thus did noah; according to all that god commanded him, so did he.
and joshua the son of nun, the minister of moses, one of his chosen men, answered and said, my lord moses, forbid them.
if i have made gold my hope, and have said to the fine gold, `thou art' my confidence;
he hath put down princes from `their' thrones, and hath exalted them of low degree.
finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.
for whatsoever is begotten of god overcometh the world: and this is the victory that hath overcome the world, `even' our faith.
and the angel of jehovah appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not; but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.
david also commanded all the princes of israel to help solomon his son, `saying',
and the man elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto jehovah the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.
all the firstling males that are born of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto jehovah thy god: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy herd, nor shear the firstling of thy flock.
they shall come trembling as a bird out of egypt, and as a dove out of the land of assyria; and i will make them to dwell in their houses, saith jehovah.
now when they had passed through amphipolis and apollonia, they came to thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the jews:
for if ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye thoroughly execute justice between a man and his neighbor;
for ships of kittim shall come against him; therefore he shall be grieved, and shall return, and have indignation against the holy covenant, and shall do `his pleasure': he shall even return, and have regard unto them that forsake the holy covenant.
and he measured the gate from the roof of the one lodge to the roof of the other, a breadth of five and twenty cubits; door against door.
and they set apart kedesh in galilee in the hill-country of naphtali, and shechem in the hill-country of ephraim, and kiriath-arba (the same is hebron) in the hill-country of judah.
his bones are full of his youth, but it shall lie down with him in the dust.
and he brought me to the door of the court; and when i looked, behold, a hole in the wall.
verily, verily, i say unto you, a servant is not greater than his lord; neither one that is sent greater than he that sent him.
so is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, i have done no wickedness.
not that we have lordship over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for in faith ye stand fast.
tell us therefore, what thinkest thou? is it lawful to give tribute unto caesar, or not?
didst not thou, o our god, drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people israel, and give it to the seed of abraham thy friend for ever?
there is a crying in the streets because of the wine; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.
the righteousness of the upright shall deliver them; but the treacherous shall be taken in their own iniquity.
and the hand of jehovah was on elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before ahab to the entrance of jezreel.
a land of wheat and barley, and vines and fig-trees and pomegranates; a land of olive-trees and honey;
the lips of the wise disperse knowledge; but the heart of the foolish `doeth' not so.
and pharaoh said unto joseph, forasmuch as god hath showed thee all of this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou:
and all the days of kenan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.
and bakbakkar, heresh, and galal, and mattaniah the son of mica, the son of zichri, the son of asaph,
for, behold, jehovah cometh forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.
but thou shalt surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.
and said unto them, sirs, i perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the lading and the ship, but also of our lives.
then said boaz unto ruth, hearest thou not, my daughter? go not to glean in another field, neither pass from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens.
the king of aphek, one; the king of lassharon, one;
i have heard the murmurings of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, at even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread: and ye shall know that i am jehovah your god.
but ye said, no, for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, we will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.
in the seventeenth year of pekah the son of remaliah ahaz the son of jotham king of judah began to reign.
the foreigners shall fade away, and shall come trembling out of their close places.
twelve years they served chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
now when pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay moses. but moses fled from the face of pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of midian: and he sat down by a well.
all the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee; they shall sing to thy name. selah
neither let hezekiah make you trust in jehovah, saying, jehovah will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of assyria.
run ye to and fro through the streets of jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that doeth justly, that seeketh truth; and i will pardon her.
if evil come upon us, the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we will stand before this house, and before thee, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, and thou wilt hear and save.
and all the hills that were digged with the mattock, thou shalt not come thither for fear of briers and thorns; but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of sheep.
and the children of israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against gibeah.
and see that thou make them after their pattern, which hath been showed thee in the mount.
shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her; they shall pitch their tents against her round about; they shall feed every one in his place.
the elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their music.
behold, the tempest of jehovah, `even his' wrath, is gone forth, yea, a whirling tempest: it shall burst upon the head of the wicked.
and the border shall turn about from azmon unto the brook of egypt, and the goings out thereof shall be at the sea.
and he commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass; and he took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
they came upon me in the day of my calamity; but jehovah was my stay.
and david said unto the gibeonites, what shall i do for you? and wherewith shall i make atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of jehovah?
whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry, but shall not be heard.
and it came to pass on the morrow, when the philistines came to strip the slain, that they found saul and his three sons fallen in mount gilboa.
so i was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me; for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and i retained no strength.
the lamp of thy body is thine eye: when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when it is evil, thy body also is full of darkness.
to all that are in rome, beloved of god, called `to be' saints: grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
thy heart shall muse on the terror: where is he that counted, where is he that weighed `the tribute'? where is he that counted the towers?
moreover he refused the tent of joseph, and chose not the tribe of ephraim,
and the stars shall be falling from heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens shall be shaken.
the high places also of aven, the sin of israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, cover us; and to the hills, fall on us.
he was despised, and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and as one from whom men hide their face he was despised; and we esteemed him not.
now the sons of saul were jonathan, and ishvi, and malchishua; and the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the first-born merab, and the name of the younger michal:
and take your father and your households, and come unto me: and i will give you the good of the land of egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
now david was sitting between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, a man running alone.
when they were come to the land of zuph, saul said to his servant that was with him, come, and let us return, lest my father leave off caring for the asses, and be anxious for us.
jehovah of hosts hath sworn, saying, surely, as i have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as i have purposed, so shall it stand:
and he commanded them, saying, this is the thing that ye shall do: a third part of you, that come in on the sabbath, shall be keepers of the watch of the king's house;
when i have brought them back from the peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations.
and this day will the princesses of persia and media who have heard of the deed of the queen say `the like' unto all the king's princes. so `will there arise' much contempt and wrath.
verily, verily, i say unto you, if a man keep my word, he shall never see death.
and i will set up shepherds over them, who shall feed them; and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall any be lacking, saith jehovah.
and jehovah sent nathan unto david. and he came unto him, and said unto him, there were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.
they that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they that were hungry have ceased `to hunger': yea, the barren hath borne seven; and she that hath many children languisheth.
sigh, but not aloud, make no mourning for the dead; bind thy headtire upon thee, and put thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.
behold, the people that is come out of egypt, it covereth the face of the earth: now, come curse me them; peradventure i shall be able to fight against them, and shall drive them out.
all the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made of the grape-vine, from the kernels even to the husk.
sing unto jehovah, all the earth; show forth his salvation from day to day.
keep silence before me, o islands; and let the peoples renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak; let us come near together to judgment.
and the princes offered for the dedication of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the princes offered their oblation before the altar.
the tongue of the righteous is `as' choice silver: the heart of the wicked is little worth.
go, i pray you, make yet more sure, and know and see his place where his haunt is, `and' who hath seen him there; for it is told me that he dealeth very subtly.
these things command and teach.
and the day of unleavened bread came, on which the passover must be sacrificed.
but mingled themselves with the nations, and learned their works,
and when they had hoisted it up, they used helps, under-girding the ship; and, fearing lest they should be cast upon the syrtis, they lowered the gear, and so were driven.
thy servant would but just go over the jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?
the voice of jehovah maketh the hinds to calve, and strippeth the forests bare: and in his temple everything saith, glory.
judah and israel were many as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.
and shaalabbin, and aijalon, and ithlah,
he said therefore again unto them, i go away, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sin: whither i go, ye cannot come.
and the women her neighbors gave it a name, saying, there is a son born to naomi; and they called his name obed: he is the father of jesse, the father of david.
and when even was come, they brought unto him many possessed with demons: and he cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all that were sick:
therefore seeing we have this ministry, even as we obtained mercy, we faint not:
and when he was come out of the boat, straightway there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,
ye shall offer these besides the burnt-offering of the morning, which is for a continual burnt-offering.
among the bushes they bray; under the nettles they are gathered together.
according to the foreknowledge of god the father, in sanctification of the spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of jesus christ: grace to you and peace be multiplied.
and they took his land in possession, and the land of og king of bashan, the two kings of the amorites, who were beyond the jordan toward the sunrising;
but when it was the good pleasure of god, who separated me, `even' from my mother's womb, and called me through his grace,
thou shalt have olive-trees throughout all thy borders, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast `its fruit'.
then hezekiah questioned the priests and the levites concerning the heaps.
ye shall make you no idols, neither shall ye rear you up a graven image, or a pillar, neither shall ye place any figured stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for i am jehovah your god.
for `i say' not `this' that others may be eased `and' ye distressed;
and ephraim is like a silly dove, without understanding: they call unto egypt, they go to assyria.
and he said unto them the third time, why, what evil hath this man done? i have found no cause of death in him: i will therefore chastise him and release him.
then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war `fled' by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden (now the chaldeans were against the city round about); and `the king' went by the way of the arabah.
the earth is utterly broken, the earth is rent asunder, the earth is shaken violently.
but the angel said unto him, fear not, zacharias: because thy supplication is heard, and thy wife elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name john.
and the thing which he did was evil in the sight of jehovah: and he slew him also.
when thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithe of thine increase in the third year, which is the year of tithing, then thou shalt give it unto the levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled.
then saul fell straightway his full length upon the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.
can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, these may forget, yet will not i forget thee.
but unto hannah he gave a double portion; for he loved hannah, but jehovah had shut up her womb.
for a harlot is a deep ditch; and a foreign woman is a narrow pit.
god is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
and the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of sealskins, and the veil of the screen;
and being moved with compassion, he stretched forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, i will; be thou made clean.
and i will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against jehovah; and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as dung.
and thou shalt be driven from men; and they dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; thou shalt be made to eat grass as oxen; and seven times shall pass over thee; until thou know that the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.
he spread a cloud for a covering, and fire to give light in the night.
and jehovah said unto moses, see, i have made thee as god to pharaoh; and aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
in that day i will perform against eli all that i have spoken concerning his house, from the beginning even unto the end.
but i hope in the lord jesus to send timothy shortly unto you, that i also may be of good comfort, when i know your state.
when she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, by the man, whose these are, am i with child: and she said, discern, i pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and the cords, and the staff.
and they ate, and were all filled: and there was taken up that which remained over to them of broken pieces, twelve baskets.
great deliverance giveth he to his king, and showeth lovingkindness to his anointed, to david and to his seed, for evermore.
but the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and truth: for such doth the father seek to be his worshippers.
rejoice in jehovah, o ye righteous: praise is comely for the upright.
i have raised him up in righteousness, and i will make straight all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let my exiles go free, not for price nor reward, saith jehovah of hosts.
but go thou thy way till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and shalt stand in thy lot, at the end of the days.
there were also that said, we have borrowed money for the king's tribute `upon' our fields and our vineyards.
but if they hearken not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.
whom have i in heaven `but thee'? and there is none upon earth that i desire besides thee.
and brought them out and said, sirs, what must i do to be saved?
for it is written in the law of moses, thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn. is it for the oxen that god careth,
and make straight paths for your feet, that that which is lame be not turned out of the way, but rather be healed.
and the fat of that which dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn of beasts, may be used for any other service; but ye shall in no wise eat of it.
and now go, lead the people unto `the place' of which i have spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee; nevertheless in the day when i visit, i will visit their sin upon them.
moab is my washpot; upon edom will i cast my shoe: philistia, shout thou because of me.
and the land shall not be sold in perpetuity; for the land is mine: for ye are strangers and sojourners with me.
jehovah, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; let me know how frail i am.
he that soweth iniquity shall reap calamity; and the rod of his wrath shall fail.
rejoice with them that rejoice; weep with them that weep.
how are they become a desolation in a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors.
and also solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.
behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not; and a nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of jehovah thy god, and for the holy one of israel; for he hath glorified thee.
and jehovah spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, saying,
take the levites from among the children of israel, and cleanse them.
but in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and i knew `it' not; they did tear me, and ceased not:
alas for the day! for the day of jehovah is at hand, and as destruction from the almighty shall it come.
for i will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.
according to their pasture, so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted: therefore have they forgotten me.
and behold, there came to him a leper and worshipped him, saying, lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
and standing behind at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
and he said, who art thou? and she answered, i am ruth thy handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thy handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman.
many bulls have compassed me; strong bulls of bashan have beset me round.
and it shall be, that whosoever shall call on the name of the lord shall be saved.
saying, go your way into the village over against `you'; in which as ye enter ye shall find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet sat: loose him, and bring him.
why art thou cast down, o my soul? and `why' art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in god; for i shall yet praise him `for' the help of his countenance.
the whole number of the heads of fathers' `houses', even the mighty men of valor, was two thousand and six hundred.
and they kept the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and `offered' the daily burnt-offerings by number, according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required;
and every one who shall speak a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the holy spirit it shall not be forgiven.
as for god, his way is perfect: the word of jehovah is tried; he is a shield unto all them that take refuge in him.
as is thy name, o god, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.
of the birds also of the heavens, seven and seven, male and female, to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
and the mitre of fine linen, and the goodly head-tires of fine linen, and the linen breeches of fine twined linen,
after many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, that is gathered out of many peoples, upon the mountains of israel, which have been a continual waste; but it is brought forth out of the peoples, and they shall dwell securely, all of them.
i communed with mine own hear, saying, lo, i have gotten me great wisdom above all that were before me in jerusalem; yea, my heart hath had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.
he shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries; and the land of egypt shall not escape.
and it came to pass on the day that moses had made an end of setting up the tabernacle, and had anointed it and sanctified it, and all the furniture thereof, and the altar and all the vessels thereof, and had anointed them and sanctified them;
and jehovah shall inherit judah as his portion in the holy land, and shall yet choose jerusalem.
and they journeyed from the red sea, and encamped in the wilderness of sin.
his ways are firm at all times; thy judgments are far above out of his sight: as for all his adversaries, he puffeth at them.
then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.
a high look, and a proud heart, `even' the lamp of the wicked, is sin.
and will not rather say unto him, make ready wherewith i may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till i have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?
for that which i do i know not: for not what i would, that do i practise; but what i hate, that i do.
for we know him that said, vengeance belongeth unto me, i will recompense. and again, the lord shall judge his people.
and he saith unto them, are ye so without understanding also? perceive ye not, that whatsoever from without goeth into the man, `it' cannot defile him;
that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief oils; but they are not grieved for the affliction of joseph.
and he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.
for god gave us not a spirit of fearfulness; but of power and love and discipline.
and asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto gerar: and there fell of the ethiopians so many that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before jehovah, and before his host; and they carried away very much booty.
hear ye now what jehovah saith: arise, contend thou before the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.
for let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the lord;
circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiffnecked.
and solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of god, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon was the showbread;
and he said unto them, elijah indeed cometh first, and restoreth all things: and how is it written of the son of man, that he should suffer many things and be set at nought?
purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, even as ye are unleavened. for our passover also hath been sacrificed, `even' christ:
a divine sentence is in the lips of the king; his mouth shall not transgress in judgment.
and the king said, turn aside, and stand here. and he turned aside, and stood still.
i said, i would scatter them afar, i would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men;
for the waves of death compassed me; the floods of ungodliness made me afraid:
two hundred she-goats and twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
and the families of kiriath-jearim: the ithrites, and the puthites, and the shumathites, and the mishraites; of them came the zorathites and the eshtaolites.
and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and ye came unto the sea; and the egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and with horsemen unto the red sea.
remember the word which moses the servant of jehovah commanded you, saying, jehovah your god giveth you rest, and will give you this land.
so the levites stilled all the people, saying, hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.
therefore, behold, the days come, saith jehovah, that this place shall no more be called topheth, nor the valley of the son of hinnom, but the valley of slaughter.
who bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the mighty man (they lie down together, they shall not rise; they are extinct, they are quenched as a wick):
and moses called unto all israel, and said unto them, hear, o israel, the statutes and the ordinances which i speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and observe to do them.
for this cause therefore did i entreat you to see and to speak with `me': for because of the hope of israel i am bound with this chain.
and pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he lay even this to heart.
yet if the unbelieving departeth, let him depart: the brother or the sister is not under bondage in such `cases': but god hath called us in peace.
now for a recompense in like kind (i speak as unto `my' children), be ye also enlarged.
and solomon sat upon the throne of david his father; and his kingdom was established greatly.
hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.
then said harbonah, one of the chamberlains that were before the king, behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which haman hath made for mordecai, who spake good for the king, standeth in the house of haman. and the king said, hang him thereon.
so he cometh to a city of samaria, called sychar, near to the parcel of ground that jacob gave to his son joseph:
and he caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.
wherefore i delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the assyrians, upon whom she doted.
for he taught them as `one' having authority, and not as their scribes.
yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, o jehovah my god, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee;
and unto eber were born two sons: the name of the one was peleg; for in his days the earth was divided; and his brother's name was joktan.
and it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he prophesieth; neither shall they wear a hairy mantle to deceive:
the king of tappuah, one; the king of hepher, one;
and joshua arose up early in the morning, and mustered the people, and went up, he and the elders of israel, before the people to ai.
but i say unto you that hear, love your enemies, do good to them that hate you,
and david took from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and david hocked all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for a hundred chariots.
and god made the two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: `he made' the stars also.
drought and heat consume the snow waters: `so doth' sheol `those that' have sinned.
and israel joined himself unto baal-peor: and the anger of jehovah was kindled against israel.
the way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they stumble.
but i will send a fire on the wall of gaza, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.
o thou that art full of shoutings, a tumultuous city, a joyous town; thy slain are not slain with the sword, neither are they dead in battle.
and now have i given all these lands into the hand of nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field also have i given him to serve him.
but his disciples took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.
give ear, o my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
get wisdom, get understanding; forget not, neither decline from the words of my mouth;
and he looked, and behold, a well in the field, and, lo, three flocks of sheep lying there by it. for out of that well they watered the flocks. and the stone upon the well's mouth was great.
then nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the satraps, the deputies, and the governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
and thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.
and one he-goat for a sin-offering, to make atonement for you.
and they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of israel, unto the king of egypt, and ye shall say unto him, jehovah, the god of the hebrews, hath met with us: and now let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to jehovah our god.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his oblation, and kill it before the tent of meeting: and aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.
that thou mayest preserve discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge.
for as the father raiseth the dead and giveth them life, even so the son also giveth life to whom he will.
and i have said unto thee, let my son go, that he may serve me; and thou hast refused to let him go: behold, i will slay thy son, thy first-born.
she hath wearied `herself' with toil; yet her great rust goeth not forth out of her; her rust `goeth not forth' by fire.
and one of them, named cleopas, answering said unto him, dost thou alone sojourn in jerusalem and not know the things which are come to pass there in these days?
for again the edomites had come and smitten judah, and carried away captives.
the children of bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.
and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to gilgal.
and i will fill its mountains with its slain: in thy hills and in thy valleys and in all thy watercourses shall they fall that are slain with the sword.
of the nations concerning which jehovah said unto the children of israel, ye shall not go among them, neither shall they come among you; for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: solomon clave unto these in love.
and he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he sold himself to him unto the year of jubilee: and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years; according to the time of a hired servant shall he be with him.
the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, who made a marriage feast for his son,
and his father zacharias was filled with the holy spirit, and prophesied, saying,
thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people; thou hast covered all their sin. selah
for yet seven days, and i will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living thing that i have made will i destroy from off the face of the ground.
and the evil spirit answered and said unto them, jesus i know, and paul i know, but who are ye?
and her neighbors and her kinsfolk heard that the lord had magnified his mercy towards her; and they rejoiced with her.
and `are' not as moses, `who' put a veil upon his face, that the children of israel should not look stedfastly on the end of that which was passing away:
`and' when they were gone out of the city, and were not yet far off, joseph said unto his steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?
and thither were all the flocks gathered. and they rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in its place.
be not unequally yoked with unbelievers: for what fellowship have righteousness and iniquity? or what communion hath light with darkness?
but i will remove far off from you the northern `army', and will drive it into a land barren and desolate, its forepart into the eastern sea, and its hinder part into the western sea; and its stench shall come up, and its ill savor shall come up, because it hath done great things.
but my words and my statutes, which i commanded my servants the prophets, did they not overtake your fathers? and they turned and said, like as jehovah of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.
hereby ye shall be proved: by the life of pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
the families of the sons of kohath shall encamp on the side of the tabernacle southward.
in the eighteenth year of nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons;
he that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off `his own' feet, `and' drinketh in damage.
for this cause `it is' of faith, that `it may be' according to grace; to the end that the promise may be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of abraham, who is the father of us all
the days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him with shame. selah
bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, we have abraham to our father: for i say unto you, that god is able of these stones to raise up children unto abraham.
but thou, beth-lehem ephrathah, which art little to be among the thousands of judah, out of thee shall one come forth unto me that is to be ruler in israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from everlasting.
yet the people have not turned unto him that smote them, neither have they sought jehovah of hosts.
for as through the one man's disobedience the many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous.
and all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.
behold, i will rebuke your seed, and will spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your feasts; and ye shall be taken away with it.
thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation upon me: changes and warfare are with me.
and when i passed by thee, and saw thee weltering in thy blood, i said unto thee, `though thou art' in thy blood, live; yea, i said unto thee, `though thou art' in thy blood, live.
be not righteous overmuch; neither make thyself overwise: why shouldest thou destroy thyself?
and abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle of water, and gave it unto hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and `gave her' the child, and sent her away. and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of beer-sheba.
and the rest were killed with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, `even the sword' which came forth out of his mouth: and all the birds were filled with their flesh.
yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
but had certain questions against him of their own religion, and of one jesus, who was dead, whom paul affirmed to be alive.
behold, happy is the man whom god correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the almighty.
now the rest of the acts of ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
boiling over as water, thou shalt not have the pre-eminence; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.
and to jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better than `that of' abel.
those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
and the bramble said unto the trees, if in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and take refuge in my shade; and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of lebanon.
so hilkiah, and they whom the king `had commanded', went to huldah the prophetess, the wife of shallum the son of tokhath, the son of hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in jerusalem in the second quarter;) and they spake to her to that effect.
and who, as i, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since i established the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and that shall come to pass, let them declare.
that i may be delivered from them that are disobedient in judaea, and `that' my ministration which `i have' for jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints;
and if any one say aught unto you, ye shall say, the lord hath need of them; and straightway he will send them.
the wicked, in the pride of his countenance, `saith', he will not require `it'. all his thoughts are, there is no god.
the king's daughter within `the palace' is all glorious: her clothing is inwrought with gold.
and it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are come upon them, that this song shall testify before them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for i know their imagination which they frame this day, before i have brought them into the land which i sware.
ye are our epistle, written in our hearts, known and read of all men;
and ahithophel said unto absalom, go in unto thy father's concubines, that he hath left to keep the house; and all israel will hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then will the hands of all that are with thee be strong.
turn you, and take your journey, and go to the hill-country of the amorites, and unto all `the places' nigh thereunto, in the arabah, in the hill-country, and in the lowland, and in the south, and by the sea-shore, the land of the canaanites, and lebanon, as far as the great river, the river euphrates.
and if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is impurity: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.
and they shall bear their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me, when they shall dwell securely in their land, and none shall make them afraid;
i tertius, who write the epistle, salute you in the lord.
also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of babylon may come; they twain shall come forth out of one land: and mark out a place, mark it out at the head of the way to the city.
but at midnight there is a cry, behold, the bridegroom! come ye forth to meet him.
to keep the commandments of jehovah, and his statutes, which i command thee this day for thy good?
while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the anger of jehovah was kindled against the people, and jehovah smote the people with a very great plague.
rise up, ye women that are at ease, `and' hear my voice; ye careless daughters, give ear unto my speech.
and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.
for he that doeth wrong shall receive again for the wrong that he hath done: and there is no respect of persons.
for our god is a consuming fire.
and he healed many that were sick with divers diseases, and cast out many demons; and he suffered not the demons to speak, because they knew him.
and when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting; and he said, i have an errand to thee, o captain. and jehu said, unto which of us all? and he said, to thee, o captain.
and jehovah drove out from before us all the peoples, even the amorites that dwelt in the land: therefore we also will serve jehovah; for he is our god.
and they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but let them serve them the rather, because they that partake of the benefit are believing and beloved. these things teach and exhort.
now i desire to put you in remembrance, though ye know all things once for all, that the lord, having saved a people out of the land of egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not.
thou hast heard their reproach, o jehovah, and all their devices against me,
and the spice, and the oil; for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
therefore on that day he called him jerubbaal, saying, let baal contend against him, because he hath broken down his altar.
till jehovah look down, and behold from heaven.
look upon zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tent that shall not be removed, the stakes whereof shall never be plucked up, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.
and he arose and went: and behold, a man of ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under candace, queen of the ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to jerusalem to worship;
and the sons of elkanah: amasai, and ahimoth.
yea, since the day was i am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: i will work, and who can hinder it?
then the prophet jeremiah said unto the prophet hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood in the house of jehovah,
a wrathful man stirreth up contention; but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.
all things were made through him; and without him was not anything made that hath been made.
and i saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the back, close sealed with seven seals.
for it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father that speaketh in you.
and for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the everlasting hills,
how long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of the whole country wither? for the wickedness of them that dwell therein, the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, he shall not see our latter end.
many there are that say, who will show us `any' good? jehovah, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
take up that which is thine, and go thy way; it is my will to give unto this last, even as unto thee.
they return at evening, they howl like a dog, and go round about the city.
and the priest said unto them, go in peace: before jehovah is your way wherein ye go.
behold, jehovah hath proclaimed unto the end of the earth, say ye to the daughter of zion, behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense before him.
for unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken away.
but jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this, said unto them, doth this cause you to stumble?
and the work of the bases was on this manner: they had panels; and there were panels between the ledges;
thou art my king, o god: command deliverance for jacob.
remember, i beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant moses, saying, if ye trespass, i will scatter you abroad among the peoples:
rejoice not, o israel, for joy, like the peoples; for thou hast played the harlot, `departing' from thy god; thou hast loved hire upon every grain-floor.
and he said, thou shalt no more rejoice, o thou oppressed virgin daughter of sidon: arise, pass over to kittim; even there shalt thou have no rest.
which i have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
and they had been sent from the pharisees.
then said i, o my lord, what are these? and the angel that talked with me said unto me, i will show thee what these are.
but god giveth it a body even as it pleased him, and to each seed a body of its own.
and god heard the voice of the lad. and the angel of god called to hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, what aileth thee, hagar? fear not. for god hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.
and jesse begat david the king. and david begat solomon of her `that had been the wife' of uriah;
and when peter was come up to jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him,
this is that moses, who said unto the children of israel, a prophet shall god raise up unto you from among your brethren, like unto me.
for if abraham was justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but not toward god.
and the children of israel did that which was evil in the sight of jehovah: and jehovah delivered them into the hand of midian seven years.
and i will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then may thy seed also be numbered.
being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, christ jesus himself being the chief corner stone;
our soul hath waited for jehovah: he is our help and our shield.
in the eleventh year of zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city,)
and moses and aaron did so; as jehovah commanded them, so did they.
for pekah the son of remaliah slew in judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day, all of them valiant men; because they had forsaken jehovah, the god of their fathers.
they have set thy sanctuary on fire; they have profaned the dwelling-place of thy name `by casting it' to the ground.
when i brake the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces took ye up? they say unto him, twelve.
therefore i also have smitten thee with a grievous wound; i have made thee desolate because of thy sins.
and at the second time joseph was made known to his brethren; and joseph's race became manifest unto pharaoh.
and jehovah said unto moses, make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a standard: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he seeth it, shall live.
thou shalt not revile god, nor curse a ruler of thy people.
and there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, jairus by name; and seeing him, he falleth at his feet,
seeing that we, who are many, are one bread, one body: for we are all partake of the one bread.
for he hath delivered me out of all trouble; and mine eye hath seen `my desire' upon mine enemies. psalm 55 for the chief musician; on stringed instruments. maschil of david.
and now, behold, the children of ammon and moab and mount seir, whom thou wouldest not let israel invade, when they came out of the land of egypt, but they turned aside from them, and destroyed them not;
and they said, believe on the lord jesus, and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house.
these are the names of the mighty men whom david had: josheb-basshebeth a tahchemonite, chief of the captains; the same was adino the eznite, against eight hundred slain at one time.
the children of hagab, the children of shamlai, the children of hanan,
thus saith the lord jehovah: because that moab and seir do say, behold, the house of judah is like unto all the nations;
and she said unto him, how canst thou say, i love thee, when thy heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.
art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou brought forth before the hills?
that frustrateth the signs of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;
and as jesus passed by from thence, he saw a man, called matthew, sitting at the place of toll: and he saith unto him, follow me. and he arose, and followed him.
and in ziklag, and in meconah and in the towns thereof,
and all the multitude sought to touch him; for power came forth from him, and healed `them' all.
and ye shall be holy unto me: for i, jehovah, am holy, and have set you apart from the peoples, that ye should be mine.
he that trusteth in his riches shall fall; but the righteous shall flourish as the green leaf.
and he made the altar of incense of acacia wood: a cubit was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, foursquare; and two cubits was the height thereof; the horns thereof were of one piece with it.
now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, whomsoever i shall kiss, that is he: take him.
and they took all the goods of sodom and gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.
and it shall come to pass that, when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in the name of jehovah; and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth.
therefore will i also deal in wrath; mine eye shall not spare, neither will i have pity; and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will i not hear them.
and they brought him to jesus: and they threw their garments upon the colt, and set jesus thereon.
and the king of israel said unto elisha, when he saw them, my father, shall i smite them? shall i smite them?
for he that is not against us is for us.
that ye abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep yourselves, it shall be well with you. fare ye well.
and i will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, that have said to thy soul, bow down, that we may go over; and thou hast laid thy back as the ground, and as the street, to them that go over.
remember, forget thou not, how thou provokedst jehovah thy god to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou wentest forth out of the land of egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against jehovah.
and if the leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin of `him that hath' the plague from his head even to his feet, as far as appeareth to the priest;
they were as fed horses roaming at large; every one neighed after his neighbor's wife.
morning by morning will i destroy all the wicked of the land; to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of jehovah. psalm 102 a prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his complaint before jehovah.
and the children of israel were mustered, and were victualled, and went against them: and the children of israel encamped before them like two little flocks of kids; but the syrians filled the country.
and i said unto the king, let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?
and it came to pass after these things, that naboth the jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in jezreel, hard by the palace of ahab king of samaria.
and the king said unto her, what aileth thee? and she answered, of a truth i am a widow, and my husband is dead.
i will make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall the peoples give thee thanks for ever and ever. psalm 46 for the chief musician. `a psalm' of the sons of korah; set to alamoth. a song.
but i say that so long as the heir is a child, he differeth nothing from a bondservant though he is lord of all;
and he said unto him, well done, thou good servant: because thou wast found faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.
and the king answered and said unto the man of god, entreat now the favor of jehovah thy god, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again. and the man of god entreated jehovah, and the king's hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.
`now he must needs release unto them at the feast one prisoner.'
and they asked him, saying, `how is it' that the scribes say that elijah must first come?
if an unrighteous witness rise up against any man to testify against him of wrong-doing,
and next unto them repaired melatiah the gibeonite, and jadon the meronothite, the men of gibeon, and of mizpah, `that appertained' to the throne of the governor beyond the river.
and the weight of the golden ear-rings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred `shekels' of gold, besides the crescents, and the pendants, and the purple raiment that was on the kings of midian, and besides the chains that were about their camels' necks.
through whom we received grace and apostleship, unto obedience of faith among all the nations, for his name's sake;
then the king of israel called an officer, and said, fetch quickly micaiah the son of imla.
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth upon the service, to do the work of the tent of meeting.
wisdom crieth aloud in the street; she uttereth her voice in the broad places;
then adonijah the son of haggith came to bath-sheba the mother of solomon. and she said, comest thou peaceably? and he said, peaceably.
for he loveth our nation, and himself built us our synagogue.
all this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.
and the elders of the jews builded and prospered, through the prophesying of haggai the prophet and zechariah the son of iddo. and they builded and finished it, according to the commandment of the god of israel, and according to the decree of cyrus, and darius, and artaxerxes king of persia.
then the king said to the servants, bind him hand and foot, and cast him out into the outer darkness; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
and under it was the likeness of oxen, which did compass it round about, for ten cubits, compassing the sea round about. the oxen were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
did not my hand make all these things?
and menahem slept with his fathers; and pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.
and they went up over the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down out of heaven, and devoured them.
ye put to shame the counsel of the poor, because jehovah is his refuge.
so the king of israel went, and the king of judah, and the king of edom; and they made a circuit of seven days' journey: and there was no water for the host, nor for the beasts that followed them.
david therefore calleth him lord, and how is he his son?
and it came to pass in those days, when moses was grown up, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he saw an egyptian smiting a hebrew, one of his brethren.
and for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards,
if ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?
or hast thou an arm like god? and canst thou thunder with a voice like him?
son of man, set thy face toward sidon, and prophesy against it,
and he shall kill the lamb of the trespass-offering; and the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass-offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
wilt thou show wonders to the dead? shall they that are decreased arise and praise thee? selah
and jesus lifted up himself, and said unto her, woman, where are they? did no man condemn thee?
the children of hariph, a hundred and twelve.
so when he had washed their feet, and taken his garments, and sat down again, he said unto them, know ye what i have done to you?
on the eighth day gamaliel the son of pedahzur, prince of the children of manasseh:
and that in the good ground, these are such as in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it fast, and bring forth fruit with patience.
take, brethren, for an example of suffering and of patience, the prophets who spake in the name of the lord.
my soul, wait thou in silence for god only; for my expectation is from him.
he that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days:
the word that jehovah spake to jeremiah the prophet, how that nebuchadrezzar king of babylon should come and smite the land of egypt.
and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;
but ye know the proof of him, that, as a child `serveth' a father, `so' he served with me in furtherance of the gospel.
for i will cast out nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou goest up to appear before jehovah thy god three times in the year.
therefore as i live, saith jehovah of hosts, the god of israel, surely moab shall be as sodom, and the children of ammon as gomorrah, a possession of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall make a prey of them, and the remnant of my nation shall inherit them.
and saul and the men of israel were gathered together, and encamped in the vale of elah, and set the battle in array against the philistines.
when thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye shall have been long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image in the form of anything, and shall do that which is evil in the sight of jehovah thy god, to provoke him to anger;
he is jehovah our god; his judgments are in all the earth.
when thou takest the sum of the children of israel, according to those that are numbered of them, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto jehovah, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.
but jehovah sent out a great wind upon the sea, and there was a mighty tempest on the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.
oh satisfy us in the morning with thy lovingkindness, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
the daughters of zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass unto them.
and he said unto another, follow me. but he said, lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
hear another parable: there was a man that was a householder, who planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into another country.
for i received of the lord that which also i delivered unto you, that the lord jesus in the night in which he was betrayed took bread;
withal praying for us also, that god may open unto us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of christ, for which i am also in bonds;
thy bars shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.
rejoiceth not in unrighteousness, but rejoiceth with the truth;
now while the pharisees were gathered together, jesus asked them a question,
for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the lord's death till he come.
for in much wisdom is much grief; and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.
for they fled away from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.
at anathoth, nob, ananiah,
in that day shall there be a highway out of egypt to assyria, and the assyrian shall come into egypt, and the egyptian into assyria; and the egyptians shall worship with the assyrians.
but he princes of the philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the philistines said unto him, make the man return, that he may go back to his place where thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he become an adversary to us: for wherewith should this `fellow' reconcile himself unto his lord? should it not be with the heads of these men?
and mattaniah the son of mica, the son of zabdi, the son of asaph, who was the chief to begin the thanksgiving in prayer, and bakbukiah, the second among his brethren; and abda the son of shammua, the son of galal, the son of jeduthun.
and hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that i am jehovah your god.
but if any provideth not for his own, and specially his own household, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever.
he will feed his flock like a shepherd, he will gather the lambs in his arm, and carry them in his bosom, `and' will gently lead those that have their young.
behold, he shall come up like a lion from the pride of the jordan against the strong habitation: for i will suddenly make them run away from it; and whoso is chosen, him will i appoint over it: for who is like me? and who will appoint me a time? and who is the shepherd that will stand before me?
and moses and eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tent of meeting, for a memorial for the children of israel before jehovah.
for i will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith jehovah; but, lo, i will deliver the men every one into his neighbor's hand, and into the hand of his king; and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand i will not deliver them.
thou shalt not kill.
oh give thanks unto jehovah; for he is good; for his lovingkindness `endureth' for ever.
and it came to pass when jesus had finished commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and preach in their cities.
but an angel of the lord spake unto philip, saying, arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from jerusalem unto gaza: the same is desert.
and he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where joseph was bound.
thou wilt keep them, o jehovah, thou wilt preserve them from this generation for ever.
and pharaoh spake unto joseph, saying, thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:
and david assembled all the princes of israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that served the king by course, and the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, and the rulers over all the substance and possessions of the king and of his sons, with the officers, and the mighty men, even all the mighty men of valor, unto jerusalem.
also the foreigners that join themselves to jehovah, to minister unto him, and to love the name of jehovah, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and holdeth fast my covenant;
the heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge; but the mouth of fools feedeth on folly.
the pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, god, i thank thee, that i am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican.
for whosoever shall do the will of my father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.
and when the king of moab saw that the battle was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew sword, to break through unto the king of edom; but they could not.
but we, brethren, being bereaved of you for a short season, in presence not in heart, endeavored the more exceedingly to see your face with great desire:
but afterward he sent unto them his son, saying, they will reverence my son.
and jehovah said, judah shall go up: behold, i have delivered the land into his hand.
but i will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall take refuge in the name of jehovah.
but thou, when thou prayest, enter into thine inner chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy father who is in secret, and thy father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee.
and afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessing and the curse, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
can a fig tree, my brethren, yield olives, or a vine figs? neither `can' salt water yield sweet.
for verily i say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which ye see, and saw them not; and to hear the things which ye hear, and heard them not.
and he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the flesh-hook brought up the priest took therewith. so they did in shiloh unto all the israelites that came thither.
for thus saith jehovah, the god of israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of judah, which are broken down `to make a defence' against the mounds and against the sword;
and saul sent messengers to take david: and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and samuel standing as head over them, the spirit of god came upon the messengers of saul, and they also prophesied.
whither are we going up? our brethren have made our heart to melt, saying, the people are greater and taller than we; the cities are great and fortified up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the anakim there.
and he that killeth a beast shall make it good: and he that killeth a man shall be put to death.
and moses was wroth with the officers of the host, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, who came from the service of the war.
and they turned aside thither, and came to the house of the young man the levite, even unto the house of micah, and asked him of his welfare.
and it was so, that, as oft as the king went into the house of jehovah, the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard-chamber.
so samuel called unto jehovah; and jehovah sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared jehovah and samuel.
the `son' of amminadab, the `son' of arni, the `son' of hezron, the `son' of perez, the `son' of judah,
for this child i prayed; and jehovah hath given me my petition which i asked of him:
and they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, both young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.
and as i began to speak, the holy spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.
and jehovah came, and stood, and called as at other times, samuel, samuel. then samuel said, speak; for thy servant heareth.
and three times a year did solomon offer burnt-offerings and peace-offerings upon the altar which he built unto jehovah, burning incense therewith, `upon the altar' that was before jehovah. so he finished the house.
and what one nation in the earth is like thy people israel, whom god went to redeem unto himself for a people, to make thee a name by great and terrible things, in driving out nations from before thy people, whom thou redeemest out of egypt?
they said therefore unto him, where is thy father? jesus answered, ye know neither me, nor my father: if ye knew me, ye would know my father also.
jesus therefore saith unto them, children, have ye aught to eat? they answered him, no.
my sons, be not now negligent; for jehovah hath chosen you to stand before him, to minister unto him, and that ye should be his ministers, and burn incense.
for i know not to give flattering titles; `else' would my maker soon take me away.
that i have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart.
every one that doeth sin doeth also lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness.
let mine adversaries be clothed with dishonor, and let them cover themselves with their own shame as with a robe.
he hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are wholly estranged from me.
and he saith unto them, is it lawful on the sabbath day to do good, or to do harm? to save a life, or to kill? but they held their peace.
and mount sinai, the whole of it, smoked, because jehovah descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.
and, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, `and' blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:
therefore thou shalt say unto them, when ye heave the best thereof from it, then it shall be reckoned unto the levites as the increase of the threshing-floor, and as the increase of the wine-press.
and they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words.
and he said, abba, father, all things are possible unto thee; remove this cup from me: howbeit not what i will, but what thou wilt.
and there came unto him pharisees, trying him, and saying, is it lawful `for a man' to put away his wife for every cause?
the men of ramah and geba, six hundred twenty and one.
deliver me, o jehovah, from mine enemies: i flee unto thee to hide me.
and he that brought the tidings answered and said, israel is fled before the philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, hophni and phinehas, are dead, and the ark of god is taken.
and joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to ahaziah, there is treachery, o ahaziah.
with long life will i satisfy him, and show him my salvation. psalm 92 a psalm, a song for the sabbath day.
she obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted not in jehovah; she drew not near to her god.
and she arose, and bowed herself with her face to the earth, and said, behold, thy handmaid is a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.
god, my rock, in him will i take refuge; my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge; my saviour, thou savest me from violence.
and gideon said unto them, i will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: jehovah shall rule over you.
and the lodges thereof were three on this side and three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
if thou shalt say in thy heart, these nations are more than i; how can i dispossess them?
this is that which belongeth unto the levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the service in the work of the tent of meeting:
when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.
lest haply, when he hath laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, all that behold begin to mock him,
but they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out;
and it shall come to pass, when thy days are fulfilled that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that i will set up thy seed after thee, who shall be of thy sons; and i will establish his kingdom.
command the children of israel, and say unto them, my oblation, my food for my offerings made by fire, of a sweet savor unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in their due season.
therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in terror.
thou didst also take thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which i had given thee, and madest for thee images of men, and didst play the harlot with them;
and jezreel, and jokdeam, and zanoah,
go ye, inquire of jehovah for me, and for them that are left in israel and in judah, concerning the words of the book that is found; for great is the wrath of jehovah that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of jehovah, to do according unto all that is written in this book.
