offering. to agni, the gatherer, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds; this when cooked and put in
a the wooden sword is safety, the hammer is safety, the knife, the sacrificial enclosure, the axe is safety;
becomes holy or perishes. his vow is: he shall not speak untruth; be shall not eat meat; he shall not
5 we will address this liberal lord, this indra that he may grant us gifts of ample riches:
the strength; the dvapara of throws; the west wind the wind; ahabuna the rsi.
'agnidh, draw off the fires, spread the strew, make ready the sacrificial cake.' verily having re-won the
even from far away come thou unto our feast, or listen it already here!
drawn, satakratu! through the hole of car, of wagon, and of yoke.
the food of the village, honey of the wild; in that he fills (it) with curds mixed with honey, (it serves) to
3 lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: formed is the furrow, sow the seed within it.
go to ruin, he lives all his life, for whom these are put down, and who knows them thus. the waters are
the active one gladly partake of the ghee', he says; verily he makes the sacrificer active and causes him
they perform (the rites of) the next days for rest, for safety. there are six-day periods. the year has six
4 they, like young suitors, sons of wealthy houses, have with their golden natures decked their bodies.
who knowing thus perform the twenty-four night rite, entering the year, reach a better station. there are
the wealth; the twenty-sevenfold the stoma, and it forming a path of the thirty-threefold; the draught ox
6 send us delightful things, ye maruts, on your steeds: come ye, o mitra, to our gifts.
23 adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, rich in food,
heaven. 'may i not be cut off from seeing thee; what heat is thine, to that of thee may i not be brought
they sing their song like women active in their tasks, along their common path hither from far away,
power (brahman) of the gods; verily with the holy power (brahman) he practises against him . him
4 your grace be with us, ye who love sweet juices: further the hymn sung by the poet mana,
why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of eapth and heaven?
to indra, the king, a boar; to varuna, the king, a black (antelope); to yama, the king, a deer; to the bull,
12 indra, the gotamas who bring thee praises have grown strong by thee.
these four goddesses, the directions of space, the consorts of the wind, the sun surveys. thus from kshetriya,
be utters speech, 'prepare the fast food.' the consecrated is bound by a vow of sacrifice; verily with
accordant, as the eye guides him who walks, have ye led our devotion onward by an easy path.
fed with the holy oil, vouchsafe us riches ye are the lake, the vat that holds the soma.
thee; for strength thee; for ploughing thee: for safety thee! (thou art) the prop, ruling; thou art the firm,
in him unite all paths that lead to riches, like rivers that commingle with the ocean.
may the disposer, radiant in this mansion with special lustre, bring the father's offspring!
g the hotr hath sat him down in the place of the hotr wise,
where thou hast arrived, o plant, there there is no fear.
kind, with the rudras, be the healer rudra, and, with the dames, may tvastar kindly listen.
may he, most godlike, speed our offered viands with homage god-ward on the path of order.
2 brhaspati, who made for such a people wide room and verge when gods were invocated,
3 juice in wide room hath been prepared to feast you: for you the grass is strewn, most soft to tread on.
they were growing worn out; kasarnira kadraveya beheld this mantra; then did they strike off their
5 yea, much-invoked! in safety through thy glories alone thou speakest truth as vrtra's slayer.
having together swiftly borne my praises to the gods, return. mark this my woe, ye earth and heaven.
thou with the fair cheek, let thy bay steeds bring thee: gracious to us, he pleased with our oblation.
as he the sole god is preeminent in great. ness among all these other gods.
3 do thou, o maghavan, beat off these sorceresses' daring strength.
one hates thee, and another sings thy praises: i thine adorer laud thy form, o agni.
thousand cattle. he who knowing thus offers the five-night rite obtains a thousand cattle. babara
18 we make a hundred of thy kine, yea, and a thousand, hasten nigh:
bridles removed. it is the unnetr who offers; the adhvaryu when he has uttered 'godspeed!' is as one
jaundice from thy limbs, diarrhoea from within thy bowels, the core of disease from thy inner soul do we charm
may all the gods discomfit him! my nearest, closest mail is prayer, my closest armour and defence.
the adversary who lurks and seeks to overcome thee, o rudra, upon him thou dost fasten thyself from
in this verse, shree krishna emphasizes bhakti as the means for attaining him. earlier, in verse 11.48, he had stated that his universal form can be seen only by devotion. now, in this verse, shree krishna emphatically declares that his two-armed form as he is standing before arjun can only be realized through bhakti. this has been repeatedly stated in the vedic scriptures:bhaktirevainaṁ nayati bhaktirevainaṁ paśhyati bhaktirevainaṁ darśhayati bhakti vaśhaḥ puruṣho bhaktireva garīyasī (māṭhar śhruti)[v27]“devotion alone will unite us with god; devotion alone will help us see him; devotion alone will help us attain him; god is enslaved by true devotion, which is the best of all paths.”na sādhayati māṁ yogo na sānkhyaṁ dharma uddhavana svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo yathā bhaktir mamorjitā (bhāgavatam 11.14.20)[v28]“uddhav, i come under the control of my devotees and am won over by them. but those who do not engage in devotion can never attain me by practicing aṣhṭāṅg yog, studying sānkhya and other philosophies, performing pious acts and austerities, or cultivating renunciation.”bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ śhraddhayātmā priyaḥ satām (bhāgavatam 11.14.21)[v29]“i am only attained through bhakti. those who engage in my bhakti with faith are very dear to me.”milahiṅ na raghupati binu anurāgā, kieñjoga tapa gyāna birāgā. (ramayan)[v30]“without devotion, one can never attain god, no matter how much one endeavors through the practice of aṣhṭāṅg yog, austerities, knowledge, and detachment.” in the next verse, shree krishna describes what bhakti is.
8 hither, o maruts, come from heaven, from mid-air, or from near at hand
do ye well offer within the fire this oblation with ghee, that destroys the spook! do thou, o agni, burn from afar
from the one and a hundred deaths, from the dangers that are surmountable, from that agai vaisvânara (the
they, following the wind's swift course go where the gods have gone before.
5 may we be they who gratify agni with sacrificial gifts,
from the sterile cows which the gods, returning from the sacrifice, created, nârada picked out as (most)
best angiras, bolt-armed, he strove to win, as 'twere, the stall of kine;
17 what time the bull bellows in other regions, another herd receives the genial moisture;
all', 'seven bays in thy chariot', 'the radiant countenance of the gods hath arisen', (with these words) he
come, son of strength, o'er whom, invoked of many! the godless hath no power to keep thee distant.
agni, be gracious; thou art great: thou hast approached the pious man,
7 agni shines forth when born, observant, mighty, the bountiful, the singar praised by sages;
2 like a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath stepped forth from the great enclosure:
soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool of the sheep,
so that no thief, no sinner may oppress us. loud may we speak, with heroes, in assembly.
4 lauded by us, let flow the spring, o indra, of excellent and brightly-shining riches.
he stirs the wearied man to pleasure and great joy what time the longing gifts approach him as he
that thou with power dost slay vrtra, o lord of strength.
lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, subduing, as our help, e'en mighty foemen.
those who prepare the cooking-vessels for the steed,-may the approving help of these promote our
which has been piled up these oblations, the cruel fire would spring up in wrath, and injure the offspring
the road by which the asvins carried away as a bride sûryâ, savitar's daughter,'by that road,' bhaga (fortune)
he were to set it up without strewing, it would be dug in and have the pitrs for its deity; he sets it up after
strewing; verily he sets it up in this (earth), and makes it firm-rooted.' 'support the sky, fill the
gracious be he the swelling child of waters, gracious be prsni who hath gods to guard her.
thy vital force that has been dissipated afar, thy in-breathing and thy out-breathing, shall come back again!
along with vetasu thou slewest tugra, and madest tuji strong, who praised thee, indra.
as on a linch-pin, firm, rest things immortal: he who hath known it let him here declare it.
3 dear narasamsa, sweet of tongue, the giver of oblations, i
this deathless indu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality,
endued with majesty and strength, o indra, and with lordly might,
3 the heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away,
it. then indeed he became a speaker of speech. he, who knowing thus offers the five-night rite, becomes
licking as 'twere their calf the pair of mothers flow onward to their common home together.
9 raise ye a mighty smoke, my fellow-workers! ye shall attain to wealth without obstruction.
5 night and dawn, changing each the other's colour, meeting together suckle one same infant:
good guardian art thou, not to be deceived, most wise! far from deceits thy name dwelleth in holy
accordant, of one mind with surya and with dawn, o asvins, grant us vigorous strength.
former of bodies, be the singer's providence: all good things hast thou sown for him, auspicious one!
away the raksases ; with a gayatri verse he draws a line around, the gayatri is brilliance; verily with
11 like manu, we will stablish thee, agni, performer of the rite,
14 lord! protect us from the west; protect us from the east; protect us from the north; protect us from
2 agni, burn down the word within their bodies through our newest speech,
high in the seat of heaven is placed the scorcher's sieve: its, threads are standing separate, glittering
he with bright rays shines forth in splendid beauty, unfed with wood. in waters, oil-enveloped.
vessel which holds the purified soma verily he renders continuous the pavamana, he lives all his days;
.1.9 mantra 9: the offerings at the end of the pressings
distinction from the evil enemy. the three days are jyotis, go, and ayus. the jyotis is this (earth), the
love of what is and what shall be, agni, in his beloved forms,
to savitr he rises up; verily, instigated by savitr, he sends aloft the wrath of varuna that is in him; with
sciences; verily he enkindles it with the sciences. 'may the wives thee', he says; the wives are the metres;
they said, 'let us choose a boon; let us obtain offspring from after the menses; let us enjoy intercourse
and that our men may spread in the encampment, let me complete the rite with these oblations.
4 let us sing praises to the gods: sing loudly, send ye the soma forth for mighty riches.
35 borne on that chariot wrought of gold, with coursers very fleet of foot,
cave,those sages, having marked the falsehoods, turned them back whence they had come, and sought
3 i call at dawn on aditi the goddess, i call at noon and when the sun is setting.
the (soma-sacrifice called) upahavya, the offering on the middle day of a sacrifice lasting a year (vishûvant),
harmonised. he holds the heavens and the earth, he fills the teacher with creative fervour (tapas).
and all acknowledge, when she comes in glory, the manifold and goodly works of indra.
time begot yonder heaven, time also (begot) these earths. that which was, and that which shall be, urged
arjun realized that all the warriors on the battlefield ready to shed blood were none other than his own relatives, friends, and family. he was filled with remorse and fearful of performing his duty of fighting this war. the cause for these sentiments was his attachment towards his bodily relatives. he became forgetful of his spiritual existence, that he was not just the body. his affection for his bodily relatives had blinded his consciousness.in the materialistic concept, we consider ourselves to be only the body, which is emotionally attached to all its bodily relatives. as this attachment is based on ignorance it carries with it the physical burdens of life like pain, sorrow, grief, and death. only the death of the physical body can end these materialistic attachments. we are more than just the physical body; our eternal souls are beyond life and death. tangled in the various attachments of the material world, we keep forgetting that the supreme lord is our only permanent relative. he is the father, mother, friend, master, and beloved of our soul.
i have enriched the singer with surpassing wealth; i have allowed the holy hymn to strengthen me.
this indra, even your wondrous god who checks attack, who joys in the delicious juice.
to thee the cow is sum of all things grateful when with the wish thou seekest men and princes.
(stoma) , for the winning of food; verily also by it they are propagated. there is an ekavinça
upon him. 'o ye all-gods, that he may win old age', he says; verily he makes him win old age. 'agni is
fiercely does the (supposed) sterile cow burn when she herds with the cattle, though she be a (fruitful) cow.
15 for bliss i call. the blissful car, at morn the inseparable asvins with their car
9 as such, o longed-far asvins, lead us on to wealth of varied sort,
10 gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the king who gives me spotted kine,
agni knows well all these created beings. great is the gods' supreme and sole dominion.
foundation, the horses in the stable i have caused to stand.
share; verily they produce cattle for him; soma is the depositor of seed, pusan the producer of cattle;
let us be in peace and harmony with our earth and with the skies. let us be in harmony with the waters and
22 god, working with mankind, flow on; to indra go thy gladdening juice:
agni, the open (mouth) vaiçvanara , the belly the sea, the anus the atmosphere, the testicles the sky
7 not often have we sinned against you secretly, nor, vasus, have we openly provoked the gods.
12 he thinker, knower both of earth and heaven, endowed with many a gift, bestowing thousands,
two hundred cows from devavan's descendant, two chariots from sudas with mares to draw them.
may heaven and earth, the all-pervading, love thee: worship the gods to win for us their favour.
2 as thine, o indu, is the praise, and thine what springeth from the juice,
god is all-pure, and whatever he does also becomes pure and auspicious. the ramayan states:samaratha kahuñ nahiṅ doṣhu gosāīṅ, rabi pāvaka surasari kī nāīṅ. [v15]“pure personalities are never tainted by defects even in contact with impure situations and entities, like the sun, the fire, and the ganges.” the sun does not get tainted if sunlight falls on a puddle of urine. the sun retains its purity, while also purifying the dirty puddle. similarly, if we offer impure objects into the fire, it still retains its purity—the fire is pure, and whatever we pour into it also gets purified. in the same manner, numerous gutters of rainwater merge into the holy ganges, but this does not make the ganges a gutter—the ganges is pure and in transforms all those dirty gutters into the holy ganges. likewise, god is not tainted by the activities he performs.activities bind one in karmic reactions when they are performed with the mentality of enjoying the results. however, god’s actions are not motivated by selfishness; his every act is driven by compassion for the souls. therefore, although he administers the world directly or indirectly, and engages in all kinds of activities in the process, he is never tainted by any reactions. lord krishna states here that he is transcendental to the fruitive reactions of work.even saints who are situated in god-consciousness become transcendental to the material energy. since all their activities are effectuated in love for god, such pure-hearted saints are not bound by the fruitive reactions of work. the śhrīmad bhāgavatam states:yat pāda paṅkaja parāga niṣheva tṛiptāyoga prabhāva vidhutākhila karma bandhāḥsvairaṁ charanti munayo ’pi na nahyamānāstasyechchhayātta vapuṣhaḥ kuta eva bandhaḥ(10.33.35) [v16]“material activities never taint the devotees of god who are fully satisfied in serving the dust of his lotus feet. nor do material activities taint those wise sages who have freed themselves from the bondage of fruitive reactions by the power of yog. so where is the question of bondage for the lord himself who assumes his transcendental form according to his own sweet will?”
17 if one, when seated, with excessive urging hath with his heel or with his whip distressed thee,
grant us abundant food, thou priestly herald, vouchsafe to give us ample wealth, o agni.
she sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accepting day and night her lord's embraces.
that he recites sitting, so the hotr goes not away from the (earth), for this (earth) is seated as it were;
21 the singers with their thoughts and hymns have, in the stream of sacrifice,
lauded of all who saw, praying for what is best, desiring glorious fame among immortal gods.
of thy dear form, o prâna, of thy very dear form, of the healing power that is thine, give unto us, that we may
agni and soma, shall enjoy great strength, with offspring, all his life.
sacrifices, and the gods delight in his sacrifice. this is the taking of the sacrifice and so after taking the
misfortune; verily he has recourse to indra, deliverer from tribulation, with his own share; verily he
my lusty shout (is) as the thunder with the cloud: then do i smite thy (sap) with my strong charm. with manly
o indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons
endowed, o gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quickly with your chariot, o ye holy.
5 rbhuksans! him, for handy wealth, the mightiest comrade in the fight,
what time ye hear our call and come, o maruts, upon your separate path all creatures tremble.
smite away the fetid odour. when a battle is joined he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to agni,
9 now may that weaithy cow of thine, o indra, give in return a boon to him who lauds thee.
he, sacrificing, fain for wealth, hath honoured the gods vath those who sit and share oblations.
6 holding his station firmly in the houses, trita sat down within his home surrounded
he cast the ram at it, it turned to the west; he cast the bull at it, it turned to the north; he cast the goat at
3 the maruts, praised by us, shall show us favour; maghavan, lauded, shall be most propitious.
2 auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the gods, victorious plant,
eater of food. it is dark, that is the form of food; (verily it serves) for prosperity. he who desires food
2 loud belloweth the bull whose horns are sharpened: upon the height above earth's breadth he
in perfect unison have all your longing hymns that find the light of heaven sounded forth indra's
the fathers, the divine folk, and all the gods severally follow the brahmakârin; the gandharvas did go after him,
who pardons not his boldness who provokes him, who slays the dasyti, he, o men, is indra.
pure, thou dost strike the vritras dead, and strivest pure, to win the spoil.
question prajapati; he said , prajapati, 'thou art the messenger of mind, for what one thinks of in the
deity should he cut off and according to each utter the yajya; verily he arranges them in due order with
of all the male worms, and of all the female worms do i split the heads with the stone, i burn their faces with
rich, asura! in sacred food and children, in full assembly, wealth broad-based and during.
moon; they depart towards the east, closing their eyes ; therefore men do not see them as they go east.
3 effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the troop,
7 ten rapid fingers deck the courser in the jar: with hymns the holy singers send their voices forth.
most beauteous of the beauteous, indra's thunderbolt, this soma, rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat.
glory of the sacrifice. 'by the rc make the stoma to flourish', he says , for prosperity. with four
10 as trees for foliage robbed by winter, vala mourned for the cows brhaspati had taken.
verily he bestows food on him in the middle; therefore in the middle is food eaten. it is offered to
after them follows the fair report, 'these sacrificers have succeeded', and therefore all succeed.
5 forward to fiercely falling blows pressed indra, herolike doing many hero exploits.
us', he says; strength is food, the maruts are food; verily he wins food. 'in the stone is thy hunger; let thy
he, lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the earth and heaven.
11 when indra hath rejoiced with kavya usana, he mounts his steeds who swerve wider and wider yet.
12 indra broke through ilibisa's strong castles, and suspa with his horn he cut to pieces:
2 the youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through many nights,-this noble band of maruts.
to go openly. uttering the discrimination he makes the vasat cry with the foresacrifice; verily he leaves
5 pleased, like a man, with our libation, indra, drink, for enduring hero might, the soma.
3 truth waits upon oblation present and to come: naught checks him in his way, this vic tory- bringing
this soma hath been pressed for you, low-strengtheners, mitra, varuna!
navel, to avoid injury. (the mortar) is of udumbara wood; the udumbara is strength; verily he wins
10 when gods immortal made both eyes of heaven, they gave to him the gift of beauteous glory.
3 may those first freshest drops of soma juice effused flow on, their way to bring us mighty strength in
them and asked them back; he would not give them back to him; he said, 'choose a boon, and then give
singing, at morn may we find thee with favour, yea, indra, and e'en now, we bharadvajas.
4 he, for god's sake, chose death to be his portion. he chose not, for men's good, a life eternal
varuna cut a pathway out for surya, and led the watery floods of rivers onward.
the plants that have been bought, that are right potent, and are praised, shall protect in this village cow,
a may i be harm us not who is father of earth
may savitar give goodliest stimulation. the caldron is made hot; i will proclaim it.
lords of all wealth, at sunset or at wakingtime, or be it at the noon of day,
deity, surya, the deity, candramas, the deity, the vasus, the deity, the rudras, the deity, the adityas, the
which has no horns, small ears, is not one-eyed or lame, and has not seven hooves; verily he buys it with
the sacrifices purified by prayer lead thee forth; the bay steeds that travel upon the road carry thee: thou
on his left hip the hero hath reclined himself: the proffered feast offends him not.
(poison) which has been dug, that which has not been duo-, and that which is inherent, 1 have held fast. as a
and thus they are ahungered; verily he makes these worlds fitted for them, and as they become fitted he
he who sends forth,, eternal purifier, hath shattered e'en the ancient works of asna.
9 after the 'way of ancient time, this god, pressed out for deities,
6 to the assembly's wondrous lord, to indra's lovely friend who gives
trinava (stoma) on either side (of the ukthya), with verses addressed to indra, for conquest. there is an
15 may we, seven sages first in rank, engender, from dawn the mother, men to be ordainers.
injures not the animals of the village, nor those of the wild. or rather should it be put down; in that he
the jagati; in that the agrayana is drawn on the fourth day, he draws it in its own abode; verily also they
moon night, they leave out a day, for they behold the month by the full moon night. he who pours
rbhus, ye iterate not to-day that act of yours, your sleeping in the house of him whom naught can hide.
the earthly and the heavenly animals, the wild and the domestic, the wingless and the winged (animals), have
i may i be victorious through the victory of agni svistakrt.
first for his drink, then three, then two, then one. that is the drink called 'of a beatific back', full of
grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. ye gods, protect us evermore with blessings.
4 this beauteous place of meeting have i looked upon, where, like milch-cows, the kine order the
all to regard their different vocations, all moving creatures hath the dawn awakened.
rohita the gods resort with glad mind: he shall cause me to rise through elevation derived from the assembly!
2 guardians infallible, eager as envoys' preserve us safe through many months and autumns.
do thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of the sea,
manifold things as it were, he should offer in the forest (fire) groats with his hand; the forest (fire) is
8 offer to him who knows fair rites, who burns with purifying glow,
to pierce (it), rudra would be likely to slay his cattle; if he were not to pierce (it), it would not be fixed;
they for the bold and lovely one ply manly vigour like a bow:
gods, as manu among men, becomes he who knowing thus sacrifices with this sacrifice. the
9 bestow on us the most illustrious strength ward off men's manifold malignities.
of which the world shall know forthwith as given by thee abundantly:
drives away sickness, bids the sun approach us, and spreads the bright sky through the darksome
9 he who with soma juice prepared amid the many honours thee,verily indra gains thereby tremendous might.
extols. he who reviles purifies them, he who extols places food in them after they are purified. they win
7 come with the mighty rbhus, indra, come to us, strengthening with thy help the singer's holy praise;
help us to wealth exceeding good and glorious, abundant, rich in children and their progeny.
17 the varsagiras unto thee, o indra, the mighty one, sing forth this laud to please thee,
12 they by whose splendour both the worlds are over-spread they shine on cars
priests?' 'brilliance and power' is (the answer). 'what by the second?' 'the breaths and food.' 'what by
his two red horses, all-supporting, let him yoke: let him, well-worshipped, urge them fast!
downward blows the wind, downward burns the sun, downward the cow is milked: downward shall thy ailment
5 maruts, this hero strength and majesty of yours hath, like the sun, extended o'er a lengthened way,
9 flow on for the god's banquet, soma, as a steer, and enter indra's heart, the soma's reservoir.
2 radiant, as high truth, cherished, best at winning strength, truth based upon the statute that
allied with thee in friendship, indra, these, thy priests, remembering holy law, rent vrtra limb from
keep ever on in an easterly direction: this is the region that the faithful cling to! when your cooked porridge has
of this thy close attendant, hast thou drunken. god, send the singer food with milk to grace it.
30 if one should ask thee, where is he who sacrificed? whither lookest thou?
a thou hast come into being by the toil; the work of the gods thou art the way of holy order. with the
us the power to speak what is noble, and what without speech would be hidden in secrecy.
yatis to the salavrkas; them they ate on the right of the high altar. whatever is left of the sprinkling
the goods of anu's son he gave to trtsu. may we in sacrifice conquer scorned puru.
o agni, thou hast made the sun, the eternal star, to mount the sky,
visnu; verily he supports the deities and the sacrifice. he sacrifices muttering, for pairing. the
we invocate for help indra untouched by eld, who maketh all decay, strengthened, for ever young.
6 he unto whom we offer praises, indra, maghavan, who hath joined to ours his wishes,before him even afar the foe must tremble: low before him must bow all human glories.
there is good grass and good water where the strew and the waters are ; the vedi is the abode of the
for me rjrasva, like a youthful lover, hath. cut piecemeal one and a hundred wethers.
he frolics and draws near, completes his work with song, and bathes in streams to satisfy the
5 immortal agni, thee whose voice is pleasant, as first in rank, as god, religious mortals
3 let savitar the god he hymned with praises, to whom the vasus, even, all sing glory.
verily he avoids the sacrificial post. prajapati created the sacrifice. being created it went away. it
3 to me they told it, and they came with winged steeds radiant to the draught,
that give abundant gifts, the thrice seven maruts, who take delight in sweet (nourishment)!
seeing shree krishna in his beautiful two-armed form reconfirmed and strengthened arjun’s sentiment of sakhya bhāv. thus, arjun says he has regained his composure and is back to normal. seeing shree krishna’s pastimes with the pandavas, the celestial sage narad had earlier told arjun’s elder brother, king yudhishthir: gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣhya liṅgam (bhāgavatam 7.15.75)[v25] “shree krishna resides in your house and lives with you just like your brother.” thus, arjun was habituated to having the privilege of interacting with the lord as a brother and friend.
o gold-coloured, lovely, sun-coloured, most handsome (plant), mayest thou come to the fracture, o cure!
continuing from verse 2.31, shree krishna is still giving instructions at the level of occupational duties. he explains to arjun about the two possibilities arising from the performance of his duty. if arjun becomes victorious, a kingdom on earth awaits him, and if he is forced to lay down his life in the discharge of his duty, he will go to the celestial abodes.
3 strong steed art thou: go to the yearning maidens with vigour, happily go to heaven and praises:
with this offering wins thus the highest victory over his foe.
the rsis have poured in continuous soma drops, ordainers who adorn thee, friend whom rsis love.
2 strong let your weapons be to drive away your foes, firm for resistance let them be.
may indra who bestows welfare, the lord of the people, the slayer of vritra, the controller of enemies, he that
6 when with their arms they rub him straight he shineth forth like a strong courser, red in colour, in the
and fright, do we place into the enemies: beat them down, o drum!
the principles of dharma cannot be determined by mental speculation. even intelligent persons become confused in the maze of apparently contradictory arguments presented by the scriptures and the sages. for example, the vedas recommend non-violence. accordingly in the mahabharat, arjun wishes to follow the same course of action and shun violence but shree krishna says that his duty here is to engage in violence. if duty varies with circumstance, then to ascertain one’s duty in any particular situation is a complex matter. yamraj, the celestial god of death, stated: dharmaṁ tu sākṣhād bhagavat praṇītaṁ na vai vidur ṛiṣhayo nāpi devāḥ (śhrīmad bhāgavatam 6.3.19)[v17] “what is proper action and what is improper action? this is difficult to determine even for the great ṛiṣhis and the celestial gods. dharma has been created by god himself, and he alone is its true knower.” lord krishna says to arjun that he shall now reveal to him the esoteric science of action and inaction through which he may free himself from material bondage.
he hath appeared, the mighty lord of conquest. what we would have him do let him accomplish.
black, brown and red soils that sustain us, do i walk under the protection of the lord, unslain, unwounded,
8 may the wealth-giver grant us conquering riches; may the wealth-giver grant us wealth with heroes.
even as thou didst waken us with satyasravas, vayya's, son, high-born! delightful with thy steeds!
good son of strength, a king amid the waters, in forefront of the dawns he shines enkindled.
beans, vetches, wheat, lentils, millet, panicum miliaceum, panicum frumentaceum, and wild rice
6 splendours they gained for glory, they who wear bright rings; rays they obtained, and men to
3 i varuna am indra: in their greatness, these the two wide deep fairly-fashioned regions,
2 heaven trembled at the birth of thine effulgence; earth trembled at the fear of thy displeasure.
movers of men, mild both, are mitra, varuna, mover of men is aryaman.
well knowing i have bound me, horselike, to the pole: i carry that which bears as on and gives us
2 longed for, most indra-like, mighty, most marut-like, most w6nderful in deed, car-borne, best
witchcraft; rudra is his dread form; verily he cuts him down to him; swiftly he reaches misfortune. he
sacrificer', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. he sacrifices to soma; verily he places seed; he
shine thou away the evil dream, o dawn, whereof we are afraid. yours are incomparable aids, and
7 as down the steep slope of a river to the vale, drawn from the steer the swift strong draughts have
as for a chariot-race, the skilful speaker, first hymn, inventor, hath with song been started.
argue; we may have knowingly committed sin; or we may have unknowingly performed evil deeds. we
may we get past the evil grâhi (seizure)! casting aside darkness do thou, (o pestle), let thy lovely voice
or, in the sacrificial chambers, vainya prthi, so be ye mindful of us here, o asvins.
3 go to the reservoir, o ye adhvaryus worship the waters' child with your oblations.
strike down, o white (horse), with thy forefoot and thy hind-foot! as timber floating in water, the poison of the
8 after thee, courser, come the car, the bridegroom, the kine come after, and the charm of maidens.
21 in many a place, the same in look art thou, a prince o'er all the tribes
the stay of the regions; may force rich in friends be ours;
with the measure of agni, with the path of the jagati, with the strength
5 no limit of thy might hath been appointed, which by its greatness sundered earth and heaven.
the plant gîvalâ (quickening'), na-ghâ-rishâ ('forsooth-no-harm'), and gîvantî ('living), a victorious, mighty
who will this day declare to us how the funeral gift was made?
'swear on oath that thou wilt equally associate (with them): then will i return them to you.' he took the
has eight syllables; the rudras are eleven, the tristubh has eleven syllables; the adityas are twelve, the
indra is the (combatant) standing on the left of the chariot, kandramas (the moon) the charioteer.
7 making the plants his nourishment, agni devours and wearies not,
2 the various doings of all mortal people by thee are ordered, in thy wisdom, indra.
the tears which have rolled from (the eyes of) the oppressed (brahman), as he laments, these very ones, o
he lives. he who desires offspring should offer to soma a brown (beast), and to agni one with a black
7 that hero deed of indra must be lauded for ever that he rent ahi in pieces.
13 thy guardian rays, o agni, when they saw him, preserved blind mamateya from affliction.
is an agnistoma with the pañcadaça (stoma), for the gaining of prajapati; (it has) the characteristics of
with hymns-for he illumines us-install him. he, jatavedas, makes our rites successful.
5 accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. come nigh, o ye twain gods, to all libations
more the gods whose is a new dwelling. with him, when sacrifice is to be made on the next day, do the
5 indra, with all thy saving helps give us assistance, lord of power.
let us recite the praise of dadhikravan: may all the mornings move me to exertion;
3 with whom thou drivest troops whose lords are heroes, and bringest daylight now, much worshipped
19 alone, when indra maghavan is lauded, he slayeth many ne'er-resisted vrtras.
6 i pour the water from the well with pails prepared and goodly straps,
be thou most near to us for bliss, a friend to aid.
14 now all that we, thy faithful servants, agni, have done with feet, with hands, and with our bodies,
that the gods praised their joyous herald's labour eagerly burning, agni, in the forests.
the rathantara, (samans). the rathantara, is this (earth), the brhat is yonder (sky); verily with them do
bless us with good minds; give us healthy bodies, sweet speech, and fair days.
after uniting (them) he separates (them), therefore the holy power separates from the kingly power. with
soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy strength enter thou indra's throat.
oblation of beans to soma and pusan; verily he has recourse to soma and pusan with their own share;
9 so urge our hosts together in the combats: yield up the godless bands that fight against us.
let all our foes be turned and driven backward. hear this, o heaven and earth, ye all-producers.
2 readily have the purple beams of light shot up; the red cows have they harnessed, easy to be
worship the vasus, agni! here, the rudras and adityas, all
then in the sacrifice they shouted lauding all triumphs won by nahus in the battle.
let thy bay horses bring thee hither as the sun, as every day they bring the sun.
12 clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels wind, was the axle fastened there.
still pressing on, promoting, purifying, agni the holy one, the lord of riches.
7 for you, as princes, for your ancient kindness, good comrades of the man who seeks for booty,
4 indra and soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on the wicked fiend from heaven and from the
mount the bay horses to thy chariot harnessed, and come to us like vayu with his coursers.
with whom the toiling worshipper, by praises, hymning and lauding, soon attained to riches.
exalted, worshipped with our gifts and homage, who knoweth holy law, to drink sweet soma.
24 he who beholds mankind, made pure with filters, the king supreme of deities and mortals,
8 o indra, heaven and earth augment thy manly power and thy renown;
so he resplendent in the battle overcame krivi by might. he with his majesty bath filled the earth and
goes out after it has been taken out (from the garhapatya) before the agnihotra has been offered should
in the name of spirituality, people perform senseless austerities. some lie on beds of thorns or drive spikes through their bodies as a part of macabre rituals for dominion over material existence. others keep one hand raised for years, as a procedure they believe will help them gain mystic abilities. some gaze constantly at the sun, unmindful of the harm it does to their eyes. others undertake long fasts, withering their body away for imagined material gains. shree krishna says: “o arjun, you asked me about the status of those who disregard the injunctions of the scriptures and yet worship with faith. i am telling you that faith is visible even in people who perform severe austerities, but it is bereft of a proper basis of knowledge. such people do possess deep conviction in the efficacy of their practices, but their faith is in the mode of ignorance. those who abuse and torture their own physical body disrespect the supreme soul who resides within. all these are contrary to the recommended path of the scriptures.” having described the three categories of faith, shree krishna now explains, corresponding to each of these, the categories of food, activities, sacrifice, charity, and so forth.
those who regard not varuna's commandments and the dear stedfast laws of sapient mitra.
sacrifice with a thousand; verily he produces and gives (it). he who has sacrificed with a thousand
o she of bright bulls hath come with the cloud, the light,
reverence; therefore the minds of some creatures are set on energy, those of others on rest; therefore the
brilliance, of the deities, of power. if he desire of a man, 'may i unite him with brilliance, with the
3 indra and vayu, drawn by teams, ye heroes, come today and drink.
with (the oblation) to which the gods flock, which is free from failure,-with it indra, the slayer of vritra, shall
him only we invoke for help in battles whether great or small be he our aid in deeds or might!
wealth. let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of our weak enemies!
i homage to the ruddy one, the ruler, to the lord of woods homage!
4 dear wealth be aryaman to us, varuna dear wealth meet for praise:
may days with bright dawns cause my songs to prosper, and may the conquered streams increase their
who, for the sacrifice's ancient lover, turneth you hither, asvins, offering homage?
12 thou, varuna, to whom belong seven rivers, art a glorious god.
with it. then indeed did they discern the world of heaven, and went to the world of heaven. those, who
the heavens, the growing plants, the living waters, the forest trees preserve their wealth for indra.
21 invincible in fight, saver in battles, guard of our camp, winner of light and water,
7 ye twain are lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, o brhaspati, and thou, o indra.
only what should be spoken. the inner grace of a person shows up through the words spoken by him.
7 thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour: an earlier saw, a later one shall see thee.
desire of a man, 'may his food be similar (to what he has now)', he should put them down for him at a
he whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice, of one accord, bring hither,
wins animals. there are all forms in these; all forms are made when agni has to be piled up, therefore
on the right, the wise one with the rudras behind, and viçvakarman with the adityas on the left. in that
4 who of you knows this secret one? the infant by his own nature hath brought forth his mothers.
flies with the teeth, frogs with the grinders; the cater with the gnawer; strength with the digester; the
yog is the union of the soul with god. the opposite of yog is bhog, which means engagement in sensual pleasures. indulgence in bhog violates the natural laws of the body, and results in rog (disease). as stated in the previous verse, if the body becomes diseased, it impedes the practice of yog. thus in this verse, shree krishna states that by being temperate in bodily activities and practicing yog, we can become free from the sorrows of the body and mind. the same instruction was repeated two-and-a-half millennium after shree krishna by gautam buddha, when he recommended the golden middle path between severe asceticism and sensual indulgence. there is a beautiful story regarding this. it is said that before gaining enlightenment, gautam buddha once gave up eating and drinking, and sat in meditation. however, after a few days of practicing in this manner, the lack of nourishment made him weak and dizzy, and he found it impossible to steady his mind in meditation. at that time, some village women happened to be passing by. they were carrying water pots on their heads that they had filled from the river nearby, and were singing a song. the words of the song were: “tighten the strings of the tānpurā (a stringed indian musical instrument, resembling a guitar). but do not tighten them so much that the strings break.” their words entered the ears of gautam buddha, and he exclaimed, “these illiterate village women are singing such words of wisdom. they contain a message for us humans. we too should tighten our bodies (practice austerities), but not to the extent that the body is destroyed.” benjamin franklin (1706 – 1790), a founding father of the united states, is highly regarded as a self-made man. in an effort to grow his character, starting at the age of 20, he maintained a diary in which he tracked his performance related to the 13 activities he wanted to grow in. the first activity was “temperance: eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.”
5 him atri, agni, have our songs strengthened according to his sway:
sacrificer would be bereft of the world of heaven. he grasps hold (of it) by means of the omentum-forks;
5 a pleasant song to agni we, sons of rahugana, have sung:
7 the foeman's treasure may be won with labour: may we be masters of our own possessions.
23 they sundered vrtra limb from limb and split the gloomy mountain-clouds,
11 now, o ye maruts, hath your praise rejoiced me, the glorious hymn which ye have made me,
9 o indra, grant a happy home, a triple refuge triply strong.
together with the body of the mortal, from his birth, one and a hundred marks are born. those that are most
16 to him whose food and work is this, who comes to take his share therein,
23 the dawns he wedded to a glorious consort, and set within the sun the light that lights him.
guardian, to the lightning as bowman: do ye guard it for us, until we arrive. to the goal here, &c.
would hand himself over to nirrti; therefore it should not be stepped on. he puts down the human head,
he deeply piercing many a thing hews it like wood with fervent glow.
d this is your king, o bharatas; soma is the king of us brahmans.
bring vigour, like a car that gathers booty: bring us, o agni, beauteous.rarth and heaven.
food springs abundant for all living creatures, what time parjanya quickens earth with moisture.
8 lovers of sweetness, rudras, she who streams with sweetness waits on you.
the tongue (?)! how shalt thou then waste away? the âdityas and vasus, indra and agni shall raise thee up unto
2 our priest is seated, true to time; the grass is regularly strewn;
dwelling, act, power, aim, strength, moving and going (prosper through the sacrifice).
2 with callings ever they invoke agni, agni, lord of the house,
16 not the deep-flowing flood, o much-invoked one! not hills that compass thee about restrain thee,
a food of the village, honey of the wild; in that he anoints with curds mixed with honey, (it serves) to
win the soma-drinking that is here. he throws down (the remnants) on the high altar; the high altar is
truth of holy order' , he says; the truth of holy order is the quarters; verily he conquers the quarters.
bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest when, maghavan, with food thou art invited.
further paijavana's desire with favour. guard faithfully his lasting firm dominion.
repeat, 'me will he choose, me' . 'choose ye the bearer of the oblation', he says; 'let him choose him
fly forth from here, o evil mark, vanish from here, fly forth to yonder place! upon him that hates us do we
13 your rings, o maruts, rest upon your shoulders, and chains of gold are twined upon your bosoms.
pain reach n.n. , whom we hate', he says; verily he afflicts him whom he hates with its hunger and
attracted by the lure of an ascetic life, people often renounce their work, only to discover later that their renunciation is not accompanied by an equal amount of mental and intellectual withdrawal from the sensual fields. this creates a situation of hypocrisy where one displays an external show of religiosity while internally living a life of ignoble sentiments and base motives. hence, it is better to face the struggles of the world as a karm yogi, than to lead the life of a false ascetic. running away from the problems of life by prematurely taking sanyās is not the way forward in the journey of the evolution of the soul. saint kabir stated sarcastically:mana na raṅgāye ho, raṅgāye yogī kapaṛājatavā baḍhāe yogī dhuniyā ramaule, dahiyā baḍhāe yogī bani gayele bakarā[v2]“o ascetic yogi, you have donned the ochre robes, but you have ignored dyeing your mind with the color of renunciation. you have grown long locks of hair and smeared ash on your body (as a sign of detachment). but without the internal devotion, the external beard you have sprouted only makes you resemble a goat.” shree krishna states in this verse that people who externally renounce the objects of the senses while continuing to dwell upon them in the mind are hypocrites, and they delude themselves.the puranas relate the story of two brothers, tavrit and suvrit, to illustrate this point. the brothers were walking from their house to hear the śhrīmad bhāgavatam discourse at the temple. on the way, it began raining heavily, so they ran into the nearest building for shelter. to their dismay, they found themselves in a brothel, where women of disrepute were dancing to entertain their guests. tavrit, the elder brother, was appalled and walked out into the rain, to continue to the temple. the younger brother, suvrit, felt no harm in sitting there for a while to escape getting wet in the rain.tavrit reached the temple and sat for the discourse, but in his mind he became remorseful, “o how boring this is! i made a dreadful mistake; i should have remained at the brothel. my brother must be enjoying himself greatly in revelry there.” suvrit, on the other hand, started thinking, “why did i remain in this house of sin? my brother is so holy; he is bathing his intellect in the knowledge of the bhāgavatam. i too should have braved the rain and reached there. after all, i am not made of salt that i would have melted in a little bit of rain.”when the rain stopped, both started out in the direction of the other. the moment they met, lightning struck them and they both died on the spot. the yamdoots (servants of the god of death) came to take tavrit to hell. tavrit complained, “i think you have made a mistake. i am tavrit. it was my brother who was sitting at the brothel a little while ago. you should be taking him to hell.” the yamdoots replied, “we have made no mistake. he was sitting there to avoid the rain, but in his mind he was longing to be at the bhāgavatam discourse. on the other hand, while you were sitting and hearing the discourse, your mind was yearning to be at the brothel.” tavrit was doing exactly what shree krishna declares in this verse; he had externally renounced the objects of the senses, but was dwelling upon them in the mind. this was the improper kind of renunciation. the next verse states the proper kind of renunciation.
rule over you; the seers did rule over you. let them make evident to the enemies when (a man) has been pierced
to him, adhvaryu! yea, to him give offerings of the juiceexpressed!
yea, bring thou near us from the air's mid-region strength, on thy car, and wholesome food, o hero.
support, and conquers all the quarters. the brahman is connected with agni, therefore the brahman
may the white-footed (arrow?) fly to yonder lines of the enemy, may yonder armies of the enemies be to-day
12 give up the people who are high and haughty to these men and to me, o thunder-wielder!
i homage to him of the dry, and to him of the green.
in all the quarters may i become a lord of strength.
15 the mortal man who serves the god agni within his own abode,
2 having gone up on high, the god broadhanded spreads his arms widely forth that all may mark him.
the curse shall go to the curser; joint possession shall we have with the friend. of the enemy who bewitches
when heroes, foe to foe, give up their bodies, fighting, each side, for children and their offspring.
ye by eternal order govern all the world. ye set the sun in heaven as a refulgent car.
.24 sukta 24 – dropsy, heart disease, and kindred maladies cured by flowing water
clothed in due season with the light of surya, red, hath begot the sacrifice in person.
in front that for indra and vayu, therefore in front he speaks with speech; in front that for mitra and
thou, o king, art the brahman priest, thou art indra of true force . o brahman! thou, o king, art the
6 i have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a stronger spell.
drink the best draught of soma-juice, o vayu, at our holy rites:
5 as thou art cleansed, o wondrous steed, o soma, thou hast entered, like
and sarasvati, the goddess of wisdom, come and sit down amidst us.
night, sent away for savitar's uprising, hath yielded up a birth-place for the morning.
which fell entered the earth; brhaspati seized it, (saying), 'be this (mine) for enjoyment'; it became a
thy lofty spirit famed in all the regions as appeasable,-with this thou rendest even things firm, stone-darter! so to win thee strength.
gladly accept our friendship and obedience: let us not go from thee to distant countries.
with her own share; she sharpens his arrow. balbaja grass he should fasten to the kindling-stick ;
steed, cow, and garment may i win, win back thy very self, o man.
and bestowed it upon them. then the metres ran away, and the sacrifice followed the metres. then the
thou as thy gift bestowest many hundred herds, yea, many thou-sands dost thou give.
3 even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert's watery pool,
he hath gone up the heights of earth and heaven, and made each monster fall and cease from
3 like grateful food, like some wide dwelling place, like a fruit-bearing hill, a wholesome stream.
the word karm yog has been used in this verse. it consists of two main concepts: karm (occupational duties) and yog (union with god). hence, a karm yogi is one who performs worldly duties while keeping the mind attached to god. such a karm yogi is not bound by karma even while performing all kinds of works. this is because what binds one to the law of karma is not actions, but the attachment to the fruits of those actions. and a karm yogi has no attachment to the fruits of action. on the other hand, a false renunciant renounces action, but does not forsake attachment, and thus remains bound in the law of karma.shree krishna says here that a person in household life who practices karm yog is superior to the false renunciant who continues to dwell on the objects of the senses in the mind. jagadguru shree kripaluji maharaj contrasts these two situations very beautifully:mana hari meṅ tana jagat meṅ, karmayog tehi jānatana hari meṅ mana jagat meṅ, yaha mahāna ajñāna(bhakti śhatak verse 84)[v3]“when one works in the world with the body, but keeps the mind attached to god, know it to be karm yog. when one engages in spirituality with the body, but keeps the mind attached to the world, know it to be hypocrisy.”
with a smaller metre on either side, verily thus he appropriates the world of his foe. they make six
and its covering; atmosphere with the pericardium; the mist with the flesh of the stomach; indrani with
c thou art the navel of kingly power, thou are the womb of kingly power.
sudhanvan's children won them everlasting life, serving with holy rites, pious with noble acts.
these morning sacrifices call you, asvins, at the break of day.
20 we summon indra to the draught, irl whom all glories rest, in whom
taken (in the ladle) falls outside the enclosing-sticks, let that be the share of my brothers.' there fore
in the previous nine verses, shree krishna explained the constituents of work and showed that each of three constituents fall in three categories. now he explains the two factors that impact the quality and quantity of work. they not only propel action but also control and direct it. these are the intellect and determination. buddhi is the faculty of discrimination that distinguishes between right and wrong. dhṛiti is the inner determination to persist in accomplishing the work undertaken, despite hardships and obstacles on the way. both are of three kinds in accordance with the modes of nature. shree krishna now discusses both these faculties and their three-fold classifications.
10 e'en the celestial axe bows down before him, and the earth, lover-like, gives way to indra.
l may the vasus fill thee with the gayatri metre, in the manner of angiras: may the rudras fill thee with
turn to us, indra-vayu, ye to whom the sacrifice is paid.
lauded in manly mode may indra-visnu grant us their powerful defence and shelter.
sacrificer is imperfect, and if one who is not a soma sacrificer offers the samnayya he is a thief and does
mitra beholdeth men with eyes that close not. to mitra bring, with holy oil, oblation.
thy bewildering quality (madam), o (plant?) that art bewildering (madivati), we cause to fall like a reed. as a
4 may the wind waft to us that pleasant medicine, may earth our mother give it, and our father
world of heaven. 'mount ye, with agni, to the vault', he says; verily with this he mounts these worlds.
connects. 'thou art the thread; for offspring thee! quicken offspring' , he says; verily the pitrs and
venomous, slightly venomous, or venomous aquatic worm,both creatures, stinging, unobserved, with poison have infected me.
7 now have we, indra, friend of song, sent our great wishes forth to thee,
8 give us not up to any man who hateth us, nor let our milch-cows stray, whose udders give us food,
who are heroic, the eaten those that are prolific. the offspring of him who knows thus becomes an eater,
together with the sunbeams, with the shine of pure refulgent flames, highborn! delightful with thy
the hotr seated at the altar, the guest seated in the house,
2 a cry was raised which reached the gods, o indra, a cry to them to send us strength in combat.
5 agni, those friends of thine have turned them from thee: gracious of old, they have become
a this soma is pressed for you, o mitra and varuna,
all these personalities receive their positions by the power of god and they discharge their respective duties in reverence to the laws of creation. thus, they are all mentioned as beholding the cosmic form of god with wonder.
3 why, maghavan, do they call thee bounteous; giver? quicken me: thou, i hear, art he who quickens.
6 with homage have we sought thee as a hero, strong, preeminent, with unfailing wealth.
the heavens have stood, the earth has stood, all creatures have stood. the mountains have stood upon their
4 like mothers to their calves, like milch kine with their milk, so, sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers
agni, with hymns may we now accomplish that which thou lovest,
2 the holy sage, renowned afar, directeth his hymns to you, o varuna and mitra,he whose devotions, sapient gods, ye favour so that ye fill, as 'twere, with power his autumns.
3 bring, by thy flowing, weal to kine, weal to the people, weal to steeds.
what time upon your golden wheels he saw you, wild boars rushing about with tusks of iron.
an oblation, to kuhu an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a pair of cattle. to agni and visnu he offers on
come with your mighty powers, o ye nasatyas; come hither, drink ye this the third libation.
15 varuna makes the holy prayer. to him who finds the path we pray.
those among the gods who are not exhausted. it has a follower to avoid monotony. he follows it with an
oblations acceptable; the gods rejoice in his oblation. the gods discussed regarding holy power; the
24 these men, the sons of bharata, o indra, regard not severance or close connexion.
the heaven's four regions drew forth drink and vigour: now whither hath her noblest portion vanished?
offspring. in that after undergoing penance he speaks the speech of the consecrated, the sacrificer thus
the kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens, earths sent their loud voices out.
tear the sacrificer asunder; the fire should therefore be thus, or he should make it by friction, so that the
9 she hath spread us beyond all foes, beyond her sisters, holy one,
in the previous verse, shree krishna stated that all objects should be offered to him. now he says that all actions should also be offered to him. whatever social duties one may be engaged in, whatever vegetarian food one may be eating, whatever non-alcoholic beverages one may be drinking, whatever vedic rites one may perform, whatever vows and austerities one may observe, should all be offered mentally to the supreme lord. very often, people separate devotion from their daily life, and look on it as something that is only to be performed inside the temple room. however, devotion is not to be restricted to the periphery of the temple room; it is to be engaged in at every moment of our life.sage narad defines bhakti in this manner:nāradastu tadarpitā khilāchāratā tadvismaraṇe paramavyākulateti (nārad bhakti darśhan, sūtra 19)“devotion means offering your every activity to god, and feeling intense separation if ever you lose remembrance of him.” when works are dedicated and mentally delivered to god, it is called arpaṇam. such an attitude metamorphoses the mundane activities of material life into divine service of god. swami vivekananda expressed this attitude toward work when he declared: “no work is secular. everything is devotion and service.” saint kabir stated this in his couplet:jahañ jahañ chalūñ karūñ parikramā, jo jo karūñ so sevājaba sovūñ karūñ daṇḍavat, jānūñ deva na dūjā“wherever i walk, i feel i am circumambulating the lord’s temple; whatever i do, i see it as service to god. when i go to sleep, i meditate on the sentiment that i am offering obeisance to god. in this way, i remain ever united with him.” without realizing its significance, many people say the following verse in temples:kāyena vāchā manasendriyair vā buddhyātmanā vānusṛita-svabhāvātkaroti yad yat sakalaṁ parasmai nārāyaṇāyeti samarpayet tat(bhagavatam 11.2.36)“whatever one does with body, words, mind, senses, and intellect, in accordance with one’s individual nature, should be offered to the supreme lord narayan.” however, this act of offering is not to be done at the end of the work by merely reciting mantras, such as śhrī kṛiṣhṇāya samarpaṇam astu, etc., as is done in the vedic rituals. it is to be done while performing the action itself, by maintaining the consciousness that we are working for the pleasure of the lord. having stated that all works should be offered to him, shree krishna now lists the benefits of doing so.
23 the sage, celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours as he flows the genuine for the truthful.
like women at a gathering fair to look on and gently smiling, they incline to agni.
the energy that composes this material world is incredibly complex and fathomless. to make it comprehensible to our finite intellect, we have classified it into various categories and sub-categories. modern science propagates matter to be a combination of elements, and the 118 elements discovered so far, are sectioned under the periodic table.however, the vedic philosophy and the bhagavad gita present a profoundly different classification of the material world. matter is considered as part of god’s energy and called prakṛiti. it is further divided into eight forms, as listed in this verse. it is amazing how insightful the knowledge in these ancient scriptures is in comparison to the developing trends in modern science.albert einstein was the first to propound the concept of mass-energy equivalence in 1905. in his annus mirabilis papers, he stated that it is possible to convert mass into energy and numerically presented it by an equation e=mc2. his theory of relativity replaced an earlier concept of the universe made of solid matter. both these theories were challenged in 1920 by niels bohr and other scientists with quantum theory, which proposes a dual particle-wave nature of matter. ever since, the scientific community has been on the lookout for a single field or unified field theory, which could expound on the relationship between matter and all forces of the universe.more than 5000 years ago, long before the development of modern science, lord krishna had disclosed the perfect unified field theory. he said to arjun, “all that exists in the universe has manifested from my material energy.” just one material energy has extended itself into myriad shapes, forms, and entities of this world. the taittirīya upaniṣhad has elaborated on this:tasmadvā etasmādātmana ākāśhaḥ sambhūtaḥākāśhādvāyuḥ vāyoragniḥ agnerāpaḥ adbhyaḥ pṛithivīpṛithivyā oṣhadhayaḥ oṣhadhībhyo ’nnam annātpuruṣhaḥsa vā eṣha puruṣho ’nnarasamayaḥ (2.1.2)"from my material energy the ākāśhaḥ (ether) was created,from etherthe air; fromair, fire; from fire, water; from water, earth; from earth, plants; from plants, food andfrom food, man. this man is madeof food-essence."the material energy in its primordial form is called prakṛiti. god glances at it when he wishes to create the world. his glance agitates and creates mahān. (there is no equivalent word for it in english, as modern science is yet to discover such a subtle level of energy) mahān further manifests into ahankār even this is unknown to modern science. ahankār, in turn, forms the pañch-tanmātrās or the five perceptions of – taste, touch, smell, sight, and sound. and from these, the five gross elements— space, air, fire, water, and earth manifest.lord shree krishna includes the mind, intellect, and ego along with the five gross elements as different manifestations of his material energy. in this verse, he states that all these eight elements are simply parts of maya, his material energy. in the next verse, he describes another of his superior energy; the soul energy.
4 he unto whom they sang the seven-headed hymn, three-parted, in the loftiest place,
raises its head aloft, so the sacrificers are highest among people. the udgatr mounts a throne; verily
13 even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give hero sons and riches to the eloquent.
2 these brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelting, like a smith,
9 by song as 'twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry was prepared
says thus. if the adhvaryu were to offer a libation where there were no fire, the adhvaryu would
thou didst produce him, deathless one! for mortal man, for maintenance of law and lovely amrita:
served with oblation, kindled, bright, through love of song may agni, bent
.92 sukta 92 – charm to endow a horse with swiftness
4 urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guileless rivers which
come, much-invoked, and on our grass be seated ' wealthy, deserving worship, for our welfare.
.53sukta 53 – prayer to kala (time), personified as a primordial power
'o lord of food, accord us food', he says; the lord of food is agni; verily he grants him food.
a flawless skin, containing curds, full to the mouth, containing curds.
now do i glorify their mighty cohort, the company of these the youthful maruts,
q thou art named juhu, upabhrt, dhruva, loving the ghee, sit on thy dear seat with thy dear name.
then tvastar, when he viewed the four wrought chalices, concealed himself among the consorts of the
into it indra shall deposit manliness: do ye, o gods, assemble about it for long life, for life lasting a hundred
a o agni, come to enjoy', he says; verily he summons him.
stablished for thee, to lend thee vital forces, giver of wealth, guard of his servant's body.
b thou art the sitter on the waters; thou art the sitter on the hawk thou art the sitter on the vulture; thou
praise to the friends who sit in front! to those seated together,praise
h praise the famous youth, mounted on the chariot seat,
he will not die, nor shall we die: his path is far: he whom bay horses bear hath turned thee to sweet
juice waits for mitra and for varuna to drink, fair juice for drink, for sacrihce.
sea,beside that indra when he smote down vrtra stood his helpers, straight in form, mighty, invincible.
drive out, that which is in the limbs, and in the joints!
and in their cups as they drink-h those that guard the paths,
release thee. guiltless do i render thee through my charm; may heaven and earth both be propitious to thee!
strong mothers of the sacrifice, seat them together on the grass.
sacrificial strew is offspring, the altar is the earth; verily he places offspring on the earth. he strews it so
he smote his three heads from his body, seizing the cattle of the oniniform son of tvastar.
not to say that text, the cow with which the soma is bought would go away. 'may rudra guide thee
2 agni, to thee i lift the oil-fed ladle, bright, with an offering, bearing our oblation.
have their name. in that he puts down the 'sitters on the vault', the sacrificer thus goes by the 'sitters on
therefore they style this offering the gatherer. he who has foes should in conflict sacrifice with this
19 may ila, mother of the herds of cattle, and urvasi with all the streams accept us;
the twenty-four elements that constitute the field of activities are: pañcha-mahābhūta (the five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air, and space), the pañch-tanmātrās (five sense objects—taste, touch, smell, sight, and sound), the five working senses (voice, hands, legs, genitals, and anus), the five knowledge senses (ears, eyes, tongue, skin, and nose), mind, intellect, ego, and prakṛiti (the primordial form of the material energy). shree krishna uses the word daśhaikaṁ (ten plus one) to indicate the eleven senses. in these, he includes the mind along with the five knowledge senses and the five working senses. previously, in verse 10.22, he had mentioned that amongst the senses he is the mind.one may wonder why the five sense objects have been included in the field of activities, when they exist outside the body. the reason is that the mind contemplates upon the sense objects, and these five sense objects reside in a subtle form in the mind. that is why, while sleeping, when we dream with our mind, in our dream state we see, hear, feel, taste, and smell, even though our gross senses are resting on the bed. this illustrates that the gross objects of the senses also exist mentally in the subtle form. shree krishna has included them here because he is referring to the entire field of activity for the soul. some other scriptures exclude the five sense objects while describing the body. instead, they include the five prāṇas (life-airs). this is merely a matter of classification and not a philosophical difference.the same knowledge is also explained in terms of sheaths. the field of the body has five kośhas (sheaths) that cover the soul that is ensconced within:annamaya kośh. it is the gross sheath, consisting of the five gross elements (earth, water, fire, air, and space).prāṇamaya kośh. it is the life-airs sheath, consisting of the five life airs (prāṇ, apān, vyān, samān, and udān).manomaya kośh. it is the mental sheath, consisting of the mind and the five working senses (voice, hands, legs, genitals, and anus).vijñānamaya kośh. it is the intellectual sheath, consisting of the intellect and the five knowledge senses (ears, eyes, tongue, skin, and nose).ānandmaya kośh. it is the bliss sheath, which consists of the ego that makes us identify with the tiny bliss of the body-mind-intellect mechanism.
they who lay quiet for a year, the brahmans who fulfil their vows,
red-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its lovely breast,
4 when varuna is fain for milk he moistens the sky, the land, and earth to her foundation.
10 we claim protection from the hills, we claim protection of the floods,
achavaka's saman is the samkrti, (it serves) to make the horse whole, to win it entirely, to prevent
wise bhrgus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and found him lurking where the floods are
4 break down the, strong seats even of the demons: cleansing thee, indu, robd thyself in vigour.
this seat, rohinî, belongs to rohita; yonder is the path on which the brindled (female) goes! her the
3 who graspest with thy might on earth. e'en the strong sovrans of the wood,
north ; therefore the left hand is most to be maintained. 'inspiration, the thirty-onefold', (with these
eat sacrificial food presented on the grass: grant riches with a multitude of hero sons.
i have taken unto myself her fortune and her glory, as a wreath off a tree. like a mountain with broad
verily he confers radiance upon himself. he, who piles (the fire) with faces on all sides, eats food in all
1 urge us not, maghavan, to this distressful fight, for none may comprehend the limit of thy strength.
5 as dear house-friend, guest welcome in the dwelling, to this our sacrifice come thou who knowest.
10 the might which usana hath formed for thee with might rends in its greatness and with strength both
the ribhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and rudras sung thee as the first.
you, asvins, lords of solemn rites, with calls entreating you to come.
crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts! mighty art thou:
makes the holy power (brahman). he speaks the yajus, muttering; it is as if one who has found a rich
is to-day, the brhat to-morrow; verily he cuts him off from to-day and to-morrow. the rathantara is the
eleven potsherds to agni and visnu ; all the gods are agni, the sacrifice is visnu; verily he has
6 he, like a mad weak warrior, challenged indra, the great impetuous many-slaying hero.
of all. the twelve-day (rite) is speech. if they were to perform the twelve-day (rite) before (what has
worlds. he shaves his hair and beard, he trims his nails. the hair and the beard are dead and impure
protect our sacred grass from man's reproaches. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
2 whoso with toil and trouble brings thee fuel, serving the majesty of mighty agni,
the tame (village) animals are separate from the wild (forest animals); the water has flowed apart from thirst. i
agni, spread forth, as ruler, over living things: give wealth, to
12 as the birds fly forth from their resting places, so men with store of food rise at thy dawning.
and they revolve round their own metre. they go by a trackless way leaving the path who start with
5 i call on savitar the god, on morning, brhaspati, and dadhikras, and agni,
6 like a car-horse who shows his strength, a god effused for deities.
5 deeming him a reproach, his mother hid him, indra, endowed with all heroic valour.
unites him, for atonement. if he were to unite him with sherds of domestic pots, he would afflict
then straight they recognized the mystic name of the creative steer,
20 forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall conquer men,
did not approach the new moon night and the full moon night . they grasped him about, and illness
convey this sacrifice to gods in heaven. ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.
does he again employ it. the second three nights begin with the jagati, the agrayana is connected with
of cattle. fifteen indeed are the nights of the half-month, the year is made up of half-months, cattle are
as 'twere from far away is heard the psalm where hymns resound in joy. he, with the triple dames red-hued, hath
and made thine own this great earth and these water-floods; with joyous heart these waterfloods.
men severally, contemplating it profoundly, behold its action upon the earth: from the fire and from the wind the
slayers of enemies, indra and agni, accept this day our new-born pure laudation.
lords it o'er soma with the stone, with soma bringing forth delight, flow, indu, flow for indra's sake.
no one who is not a soma sacrificer should offer the samnayya. for the milk of him who is not a soma
8 whate'er from olden time, heaven, earth! existeth great object of the wrath of gods and mortals,
4 shared by all gods, infallible, the leader of our holy hymns,
first help thou on to strength the man who strives to win, and aid our laud, o ancient one.
the worms with white shoulders, the black ones with white arms, and all those that are variegated, these
the earthly region, indra, comprehends thee not. after thy godhead hast thou waxed.
this one at the station of the brown (sun) did attain unto the worlds of light.
6 brhaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the weapon of reviling vala,
o mitra-varuna whomsoe'er ye: favour, here, to him the rain with sweetness streameth down from
d homage to the cheater, the swindler, to the lord of burglars homage!
that food and strength do ye, o maruts, bounteously bestow upon us.
23 full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of lauds which, even of old, they sang you.
o maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid: make plenteous food stream forth for us.
4 with all the gods, o indu pavamana, while thou art roaring send us wealth in horses.
7 yoke to the firmly jointed car the ass which draws you, lords of wealth.
the seven rishis, that did create the beings, shall here churn thee, along with progeny!
3 whom, as 'twere down a precipice, swift rushing, each puru praises and his heart rejoices,springing forth like a hero fain for battle, whirling the car and flying like the tempest.
prospers, his foe is defeated. he divides five times; for five times did they divide. then again the pankti
.4 sukta 4 – prana (life; breath), personified as the supreme spirit
the twenty-twofold', (with these words he puts down) on the west; in that there are twenty, thereby there
3 to indra, vayu, varuna, to visnu, and the maruts, flow
like one who goes strai ht to the point directed, ye nasatyas, to mine invocation.
thou hast chastised, o indra, lord of strength, the man who worships not,
vent to his voice, inciteth men to worshipwith lauds bring indra hither to our dwellings.
4 the lofty battle-car thou broughtest forward; thou holpest dasadyu the strong when fighting.
impregnates seed. 'thou givest good protection, and art well established', he says, for he draws soma in
3 he with his shining glory blazing far and wide, he verily it is who slayeth demon foes, slayeth the
the most appropriating of gods; he says indra later; verily he places strength in him at the top. he offers
and do ye, o çuna and sira, accord prosperity to us.
6 in battles be victorious. we seek thee, lord of hundred powers,
8 out of a skin, o rbhus, once ye formed a cow, and brought the mother close unto her calf again.
5 touch ye the far-extending height of heaven or spring apart to suit the wide earth's measure.
yea, verily thou art a bull, our guardian, rushing like a bull:
vaiçvanara, agni vaiçvanara is the year; verily he accepts (the ewe) made suitable by the year; he does
god, working with mankind, flow on; to indra go thy gladdening juice: to vayu mount as law commands!
indra's (cake) he should cut off from the all-gods, and then from indra's ; verily with power
(and also make them see) her that strides upon the mist, the mutilated one, who dwells with the mutilated; the
him the displeasure of the famous moves not, outrage and scorn affect not such a mortal.
.4.9 mantra 9: the explanation of the mantras in 4. 7
3 so, bringing treasure, dawn to-day on us thou daughter of the sky,
5 here-, courser, are the places where they groomed thee, here are the traces of thy hoofs as winner.
22 to me hath pakasthaman given, a ruddy horse,good at the pole,
we compass thee like water, we whose grass is trimmed and soma pressed.
with the brhat and rathantara's stoma with the path of the tristubh,
'o agni, thou art great', he says, for agni is great. 'o brahman', he says, for he is a brahman. 'o
and an eater of food. 'by sacrifice to the god indra, may i be powerful', he says; verily he becomes
4 to indra, even as rivers to the ocean, flow forth from days of old the soma juices;
hitherward have i called to-day, for succour, that most wondrous car
allied with thee, in this thy friendship, soma, indra for man made waters flow together,
three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed their sweet streams around him with a murmur.
indra, to whom all beings turn their constant thought,-him girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
to give eternal glow, we pray vaisvanara the holy one, lord of the light of sacrifice.
1 why hath the best, why hath the youngest come to us? upon what embassy comes he? what have
filled full of fatness, compassing all things that be, wide, spacious, dropping meath, beautiful in their
sacrificer appropriates the power and strength of his enemy. 'he who performs more rites of sacrifice',
the child of the streams, the tawny one, rooted in the mountain,
with the light', he says; verily he bestows light upon him. he places him with four (verses); the metres
verily he has recourse to mitra and varuna with their own share; verily they by day and night beget
11 the mighty heaven and earth, those bright expanses that have no wheels, joyed, indra, at thine
c agni angiras, thou who art in this earth, come with the name of ayus. whatsoever unapproached,
2 loose in the wind the woman's robe was streaming what time she won a car-load worth a thousand.
6 to him the truly strong, whose deeds are many, to him the strong bull let us pour the soma.
and men have faith in indra, the respiendent one, what time he hurleth down his bolt, his dart of death.
making the three-times seven pour out the milky stream, soma, the cheerer, yields whate'er the heart
seven are the aditya deities,-with these, o soma, guard thou us. flow, indu, flow for indra's sake.
16 if, indra, thou drink soma by visnu's or trta aptya's side,
10 so, lord of affluent gifts, this juice hath been pressed for thee with strength
when she, yet unimpregnate, hath conceived thee, even when newly born thou art an envoy.
thou indra, hast spread out the earths high ridges, and firmly fixed the region under heaven.
i offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the drop which still to one same place is moving.
the senses are like wild horses that have been newly harnessed. they are impetuous and reckless, and hence, disciplining them is an important battle that sādhaks have to fight within themselves. therefore, those desirous of spiritual growth should carefully strive to tame the indulgent senses, which are colored with lust and greed, or else they have the power to sabotage and derail the spiritual process of even the most well-intentioned yogis.the śhrīmad bhāgavatam relates a story that perfectly illustrates this statement (canto 9, chapter 6). there was a great sage in ancient times, known as saubhari. he is mentioned in the rig veda, where there is a mantra called saubhari sutra. there is also a scripture called the saubhari samhita. so he was not just an ordinary sage. saubhari had attained such control over his body that he used to submerge himself in the river yamuna and meditate under water. one day, he saw two fish mating. this sight carried away his mind and senses, and the desire for sexual association arose in him. he abandoned his spiritual practice and came out of the water, wondering how to fulfill his desire.at that time, the king of ayodhya was mandhata, who was a very illustrious and noble ruler. he had fifty daughters, each more beautiful than the other. saubhari approached the king and asked for the hand of one of the fifty princesses.king mandhata wondered about the sanity of the sage and thought to himself, “an old man wanting to get married!” the king knew saubhari to be a powerful sage, and feared that if he refused, the sage might curse him. but if he consented, the life of one of his daughters would be ruined. he was in a dilemma. so he said, “o holy one! i have no objection to your request. please take a seat. i shall bring my fifty daughters before you, and whosoever chooses you will become yours in marriage.” the king was confident that none of his daughters would choose the old ascetic, and in this way, he would be saved from the sage’s curse.saubhari was all too aware of the king’s intention. he told the king that he would return the following day. that evening, he used his yogic powers to turn himself into a handsome young man. consequently, when he presented himself at the palace the next day, all the fifty princesses chose him as their husband. the king was bound by the word he had given and was compelled to marry all his daughters to the sage.now the king was concerned about the fights that would take place amongst the fifty sisters, since they would have to share a husband. however, saubhari again used his yogic powers. putting the king’s apprehension to rest, he assumed fifty forms and created fifty palaces for his wives, and lived separately with each one of them. in this manner, thousands of years passed by. the puranas state that saubhari had many children from each of them, and those children had further children, until a tiny city had been created. one day, saubhari came to his senses, and exclaimed, aho imaṁ paśhyata me vināśhaṁ (bhāgavatam 9.6.50) [v51] “o humans! those of you, who make plans to attain happiness through material acquisitions, be careful. look at my degradation—where i was and where am i now. i created fifty bodies by my yogic powers, and lived with fifty women for thousands of years. and yet, the senses did not experience fulfillment; they only kept hankering for more. learn from my downfall and be warned not to venture in this direction.”
i call with prayers on aditi your goddess, on agni, mitra, varuna for favour,
it were will; verily by will he wins will which is splendour. he who practises witchcraft should offer a
connected with prajapati; verily he piles the fire with prajapati. the first brick that is put down obstructs
once spiritual sentiments have sprouted, they cannot be wiped out. the soul with devotional sanskārs (tendencies and impressions) from the present and past lifetimes gets naturally inspired toward spirituality. such an individual feels drawn toward god, and this pull is also referred to as “the call of god.” based upon the past sanskārs the call of god sometimes becomes so strong that it is said, “the call of god is the strongest call in one’s life.” people who experience it reject the entire world and the advice of their friends and relatives to tread the path that draws their heart. that is how in history, great princes, noblemen, wealthy businesspersons, etc. renounced the comfort of their worldly position to become ascetics, yogis, sages, mystics, and swamis. and since their hunger was for god alone, they naturally rose above the ritualistic practices prescribed in the vedas for material advancement.
two are drawn together, the last two together; therefore the seasons are in pairs. the season-vessel has
give bharadvaja hero patrons, indra indra, be ours upon the day of trial.
7 may earth restore to us our vital spirit, may heaven the goddess and mid-air restore it.
full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his truth supported earth's foundation.
eight potsherds to agni, the all-knower; verily he has recourse to agni, the all-knower, with his own
14 who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth glory in his wars,
yoking red horses to and fro thou goest between you deities and mortal races.
4 this agni, lord of wealth and spoil hundredfold, thousandfold, is head
free me from yama's fetter, from sin and offence against the gods.
strength of waters and plants, protection of all life, extending; homage to the way!
10 wherewith ye helped, in battle of a thousand spoils, vispala seeking booty, powerless to move.
26 so now we seek thee fresh in might, most wonderful in act! for gain:
ye are the stable by name; your houses are in the north; your arrows are the waters; the sea, &c.
imprecations', he says; for that guards from imprecations and is impervious to imprecations. 'may the
is enclosed, the evil spirits are enclosed', he says, for the smiting away of the raksases . 'thus i cut
anustubh has thirty-two syllables, prajapati is connected with the anustubh-gaining prajapati by his
13 loud hath she lowed, licking the other's youngling. on what world hath the milch-cow laid her
they who drive spotted steeds, sent down by prsni, gave ear, the warriors and the harnessed horses.
times; verily he delights four-footed cattle; twice again he says, 'for the season'; verily he delights twofooted (cattle). 'give directions for the season', six times he says; 'for the seasons', four times; therefore
6 mitra, ye gods with wandering eyes, would that the worshippers and we
obtains the kingdom and food. to him they gave that share which they cut off for agni svistakrt. in that
thou hast disclosed the light to light the arya: on thy left hand, o indra, sank the dasyu.
d the fire is the year, its bricks are arranged threefold, those of prajapati, of visnu , of viçvakarman;
8 as gladdener, warrior never harmed in battle, with thousand genial streams, pour strength and
19 o ye adityas, this your might is not to be despised by us:
as from a mountain fiow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts who feedeth many a one.
create offspring, win offspring, procure offspring, and possess offspring. there is an atiratra with the
5 to him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great riches un der his control,
6 because the father hath produced thee, leader of all our solemn rites, their brilliant banner:
and may your life be filled with glory. may your husband see a hundred summers.
4 three several words are uttered: kine are ]owing, cows who give their milk:
killing the darkness at the light's foundation, the couple newly born attain their beauty.
the bolt kindles him to prosperity, or it burns him; the twenty-onefold is the stotra used, for support;
thou slayer of the evil fiend, saviour of singer such as i.
8 these brahmans with the soma juice, performing their year-long rite, have lifted up their voices;
cut ye with skill, so that the parts be flawless, and piece by piece declaring them dissect them.
he rose, a light, that kills vrtras and enemies, best slayer of the dasyus, asuras, and foes.
the missile of the gods shall pass thee by! i pass thee across the mist (of death); from death i have rescued
let brahmans and angirases come forward, and let the roar of cloudy heaven surround us.
he broke the never-broken ridge of vala. with words of might indra subdued the panis.
repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacrificer peace and cornfort!
20 killing the foeman and his hate, and winning booty every day,
4 lords of the brave, infallible, foe-destroyers, great kings, bestowers of fair homes to dwell in,
strew a new barhis for the porridge: pleasing to its heart, and lovely to its sight it shall be! upon it the gods
wherewith thou foundest shining lights for ayu and for manu's sake:
34 the whcel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied by song,
3 earth at their racings trembles as if weak and worn, when on their ways they yoke their cars for
all indra's enemies were slain and passed away like froth and foam.
4 her very name i utter not: she takes no pleasure in this man.
it away from them; if he were to put it with them, it would become spoiled. he makes it go forward with
o agni, holy and divine with splendour and thy pleasant tongue. bring thou the gods and worship
to the descendants of the rishis i make thee over, o porridge; those who are not descended from rishis
this spotted bull hath come, and sat before the mother in the east,
full many a morn remains to dawn upon us: in these, o varuna, while we live direct us.
and bearing with them his supremest glory the youthful ones, gold-coloured, move around him.
protect us by three hymns, o lord of power and might, bright god, by four hymns guard us well!
swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he stretched his forefeet, fain to win and triumph.
whereby we may extend ourselves ever over the folk; and send us strength that shall deserve the
to thee, immortal! when to life thou springest all the gods sing for joy as to their infant.
invite ye indra with a song to drink your draught of soma juice,
may we be in harmony with our kinfolk, in harmony with strangers; do ye, o asvins, establish here agreement
the most agreeable, the best of carriers, the best caller of the gods.
then the calf lowed, and looked upon the mother, the cow who wears all shapes in three directions.
possessions', he says; tvastr is the form-maker of the pairings of cattle; verily he places form in cattle.
6 to seat your indra, i will spread abroad with power this song of praise.
of deep devotion, ne'er subdued, bringer of glory to his sire.
9 allied by worship, let him give man knowledge: by an extended cord they lead him onward.
3 mark closely, maghavan, the words i utter, this eulogy recited by vasistha:
indra was unsettled. he ran up to prajapati; he gave him this (rite) of twenty-one nights; he grasped it,
place; with the jagati metre i grasp thee in the manner of angiras.
on eight potsherds at the new moon, and the curds for indra . he offered it, and by it he won the gods
may the cow nourish him with milk to feed llim. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
these songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of praise ascend to thee,
n these are thine overlords, to them honour, be they gracious to us, him whom we hate and who hateth
joyful in this place, procuring for me full freedom from enmity!
c thou art the sovereign, the western quarter ; the adityas, the deities, are thine overlords, soma
down, may he smite away from us misfortune', he says, for support. 'o plants, do ye rejoice in him',
5 the bull whose strength hath waxed, whom maruts follow, free-giving indra, the celestial ruler,
great as he was, soma hath gained strength by this high solemnity:
5 ye have regard unto our hymns, nasatyas, thinking of our words:
7 as rushing down the rapids of a river, flow swifter than the wind the vigorous currents,
for i in truth am fierce and strong and mighty. i bent away from every foeman's weapons.
glad thee: thy glory hath been quaffed, lord of bay steeds, as 'twere the bowl's enlivening mead.
6 thus do they magnify me, me the mighty higher than even high heaven is my car-pole.
3 varuna lets the big cask, opening downward, flow through the heaven and earth and air's mid-region.
12 give us fleet coursers to convey indra and agni, and bestow
20 hear us the mouatains which distil the rain-drops, and, resting firm, rejoice in freshening moisture.
your lofty coursers hasten over the everlasting realm, whea your car flies with winged steeds.
12 flow to our sieve, a gladdening draught that hath most intercourse with gods,
4 thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. listen, o child of pajri, for to thee i speak.
b thou art taken with a support; to the adityas thee!
with mightier power, bold god, extend thy firmness: let not malignant yatudhanas harm thee.
that earth which formerly was water upon the ocean (of space), which the wise (seers) found out by their skilful
strength; the treta of throws; the south wind the wind; sanatana, the rsi.
this, (o winnowing-basket), is thy purpose, and this thy nature: may aditi, mother of heroes, take hold of thee!
both. in that the prsthas are performed in succession , they conquer by them yonder world. in that the
12 o agni, drive afar our foes, our troubles chase malady away and wicked demons.
26 may indra give thee skill, and lights of heaven, wealth to his votary
4 thou smotest vrtra from the earth, smotest him, indra, from the sky.
like the chief consort of a king riches and strength proceed from thee.
12 vast, with thine ample power, with eager movement, against this vrtra cast thy bolt of thunder.
10 o agni! come and take your seat amidst us; hear the praise, and accept
17 which of us twain knows where they speak together, upper and lower of the two rite-leaders?
hearkening to us with help do thou sit on thy place.
meshes to the naksatras. the garment is thus connected with all the gods; in that he consecrates him
gandharvas and the apsaras have partaken of, with that make me fragrant: not any one shall hate us!
8 adorned with their array of gold and jewels, they o'er the earth a covering veil extended.
c here is support, hail! here is keeping apart, hail! here is joy, hail! here is delight, hail!
13 the strong bay horses of the sun thou stayedst: this etasa drew not the wheel, o indra.
for there is none but only thou to show us race, o maghavan, thou much invoked.
10 roll onward to the bowls, o mighty one, effused, as prince supporter of the tribes.
3 agni, envoy, i place in front; the oblation-bearer i address:
bring wealth from all sides for the fivefold people. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
through the fine fingers, with the song, this hero comes with rapid cars,
helped, indra maghavan, by thee in war of old, may we subdue in fight the men who strive with us,
twenty-four syllables , splendour is connected with the gayatri; verily in the gayatri and in splendour
that protects the body, furnishes threefold defence, in order to (secure) strength!
heaven. 'go to the sky, fly to heaven', (with these words) he takes out the gold after the offering ;
i we choose agni the messenger, the herald, master of all wealth,
seasonal (bricks); the seasonal (bricks) are the abode dear to the seasons; verily he wins the abode dear
him with ths fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved of all,
undeceivable; the foe cannot deceive him who has piled; verily also he wins the gods.
11 thou whom gopavana made glad with song, o agni angiras,
4 gold-coloured, bannered with the smoke, urged by the wind, aloft to heaven
here, arjun is referred to as “the crowned one.” he had once helped indra kill two demons. as a token of his pleasure, indra had placed a dazzling crown on his head. in this verse, sanjay refers to the crown on arjun’s head. but a crown is also the symbol of monarchy, and sanjay deliberately uses the word to hint to the old king dhritarasthra that his sons, the kauravas, will lose the throne to the pandavas in the impending war.
with (life's) spirit this man shall be, sharing in the sun, in the world of immortality (amrita)!
give us our portion in the sun through thine own mental power and aids;
they have prepared and fashioned for this hero words never matched, most plentiful, most
and giving to the lord of the sacrifice increase of wealth.
gathers) with the metres. (he gathers) with gayatri verses for a brahman, for the brahman is connected
soma found a thousand; indra discovered it after him. yama approached them and said to them, 'may i
he brake in pieces susna's brood who still expected not the stroke, and won for us the heavenly
5 a bull begat the bull for joy of battle, and a strong mother brought forth him the manly.
pondering what is dearest and most noble, i long to see the sages full of wisdom.
strength, from his eyes, from his ears, from his trunk, from the members, from life; swiftly he comes to
i be adorned with the naksatras', said yonder (sky); i may i be adorned with variegated things', said this
b all this the adhvaryu, as he begins, begins for the udgatrs; 'may these gods who support breath
morning, verily he obtains the days and nights, and making them into bricks piles them up. he offers ten
agni sprang into being, magnifying both his parents, heaven and earth, rich in prolific seed.
6 indra, we laud thy great deeds wrought aforetime, we laud thine exploits later of achievement;
h may the two ankas, the two nyankas, which are on either side of the chariot,
third three nights begin with the tristubh, the çukra is connected with the tristubh ; in that the çukra
seed in one direction in an encircled (place), and he becomes rich in cattle. with (a verse) addressed to
6 him, duly coming as their germ, have plants received: this agni have maternal waters brought to life.
when the pure treasure unto thee they offered, the milk shed from the cow who streameth nectar.
16 cleansed by the pressers, armed with noble weapons, stream to us the fair secret name thou
4 i will send forth my songs in flow unceasing, like water from the ocean's depth, to indra.
accordant, of one mind with surya and with dawn, -the presser's soma, asvins drink.
that which in ausija's abode lies hidden, to come forth for delight and for devotion.
until the conclusion, the heads would be exhausted; in that he offers the animals, he wins thereby
5 come to us, o ye asvins, now with steeds of many a varied hue,
born; verily with the year he produces cattle for him. he offers on a blade of darbha grass ; the
therefore do ye, o kings, accomplish what we ask, ye righteous ones, whate'er we ask.
5 hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, oven of old, from men.
soothes him with his portion. 'for him indeed is the çatarudriya offered in truth', they say, 'for whom
metre; the bull in strength, the satobrhati metre; the bullock in strength, the kakubh metre; the milch
then indra heard vasistha as he praised him, and gave the trtsus ample room and freedom.
force he wins force for him; he becomes possessed of force. they should be offered for him who is
to this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught art thou called forth:
sing out the pious at your sacrifices to move with adorations earth and heaventhe holy singers, whose unmatched devotions, like a tree's branches, part in all directions.
3 pour on the sieve the soma, ne'er subdued in waters, waterless,
waters; he who knows thus reaches not destruction in the waters. 'with thy light which is in the sky', he
when, with the ten that dwell together closely joined, the men whose hands are skilful cleanse the
smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise and worship, priest for ever.
thy spirit, that went far away to yama to vivasvan's son,
g o brahman! thou, o king, art the brahman priest, thou art savitr of true instigation. o brahman!
the third corrects the imperfections left by each. thou who didst these things first art worthy of our
5 agni, be this our sacrifice eternal, with brave friends, rich in kine and sheep and horses,
moon (sacrifices); on every day (the soma) of those who have oblation holders is pressed. by him who
urging thy might, with these fair lauds they seek thee, o theme of song, as horses rush tobattle.
becomes possessed of a home, and things go in order for him. the others he puts down in pairs, but four
2 come thou to our libations, drink of soma; soma-drinker thou!
strew, verily lie wins autumn. he offers with the cry of 'hail!'; verily he wins the winter. therefore in
may maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hundreds of cattle and of steeds.
o usas, waken up for me the sounds of joy: send us the riches of the great.
b o agni, drive away those foes of ours that are born with force;
it pleases the cattle when she is given to the brahmans; moreover, the sterile cow is pleased, when she is
quarter; (the brick) which he put down behind became the tail, that is the western quarter; (the brick)
2 verily no one knoweth whence they sprang: they, and they only, know each other's birth.
1 dawn on us with prosperity, o usas, daughter of the sky,
.65 sukta 65 – charm with the apamarga plant, against curses, and the consequences of
whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame
with the fourfold stoma; in that there is the fourfold stoma, (it is) to make whole the horse.
14 that which ye guard and grace in battle, o ye gods, ye maruts, where the prize is wealth, where
4 plants, by this name i speak to you, mothers, to you the goddesses:
him, too, sarasvati and agni further, and there is none to rob him of his riches.
utter speech, cannot utter speech; sarasvati is speech; verily he has recourse to sarasvati with her own
6 one who is lord of suca, lord of suca caring for herself:
4 this one great power of thine our eyes have witnessed, wherewith thou slewest varasikha's children,
smites away the raksases. he places the two kindling-sticks upright, for upwards they smite away the
desire is an active craving for things not attained. fueled with passion, one achieves and experiences the desired objects. but this causes attachment, which is a passive mental emotion that provokes the thirst for more. therefore, when shree krishna states kāma-rāga-vivarjitam; he means “devoid of passion and attachment.” explaining the nature of his strength, he says that he is the serene and sublime strength in people, which empowers them; to successfully fulfill their duties and responsibilities.when sexual activity is undertaken only for sensual pleasure and is devoid of any regulative principles, it is considered beastly or animalistic. whereas, it is regarded, in line with the scriptural injunctions and not a contrary virtue, when carried out for procreation by a householder. here, shree krishna has mentioned that within the institution of marriage, he is the controlled, virtuous, and well-intended sexual activity of a householder.
do thou, o drum, in unison with indra and the gods ,
who, sent by indra and advised by varuna, have gotten for themselves a share of surya's light
12 the warrior host, the bharatas, fared over the singer won the favour of the rivers.
heaven and earth, first by everlasting order, speakers of truth, are near enough to hear us,
sacrifices in the southern fire; verily he does not mingle the breaths. some of the altars are besprinkled,
7 three are those births, the true, the most exalted, eagerly longed-for, of the god, of agni.
fast he upheld the earth that nourisheth all life, and stayed the heaven from falling by his wondrous
he practise witchcraft , he should put (it) down (with the words), 'i set thee down on the breath of
comes not to us; let us both summon her.' the gandharvas uttered a spell, the gods sang, she went to the
10 visnu, the guardian, keeps the loftiest station, upholding dear, immortal dwelling-places.
so may we, through your friendship for the worshipper, subdue the fiends.
make a pair; he sacrifices to agni, lord of the house, for support. there is sameness in the sacrifice in
5 so have i found and rescued thee thou hast returned with youth renewed.
antelope skin; verily he afflicts with pain wild animals ; therefore of animals of even birth the wild
this was the task. appear promptly, ye prudent ones. here is the chariot drawn by strong steeds:
4 indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the vigour of these men,
did vayu make him sweet for him; therefore what becomes putrid they hang out in a windy place, for
pile (it) on earth, he would afflict the earth with pain; nor trees, nor plants would be born; if he
g with one foot, two feet, three feet, four feet, five feet, six feet, seven feet, eight feet may she extend
passed through, the fleece in thousand streams the soma, purified, flows on
6 may he who to the offerer gives the foeman's man-sustaining food,
4 well is it known, o mighty ones: ye open heaven; for you the chariotsteeds are yoked for morning
effortless they pass on to perfect this and that, appointed works which brahmanaspati ordained.
makes good his vow for him; he becomes a keeper of vows. to agni, slayer of raksases, he should offer
for him, strong, independent ruler, heaven and earth have fashioned forth with power and might.
how is it that thou seekest not the village? art thou not afraid?
from thee, as branches from a tree, o agni, from thee, auspicious god! spring all our blessingswealth swiftly, strength in battle with our foemen, the rain besought of heaven, the flow of waters.
thou, maghavan, rentest with thy bolt the dragon who lay against the waterfloods of heaven.
antelope skin is the form of holy power; he puts on a pair of black sandals; verily by the holy power he
9 here of free choice let each one serve thee richly, resplendent day by day at eve and morning.
6 when to your car-poles ye have yoked your spotted deer to be your steeds, and put your golden
onward hath soma passed through the sheep's fair bright fleece, and hath, as 'twere, endued a
2 to thee, o wanderer at will, ring out the lauds with beams of day,
with the weapon with which the god drove forth the asuras, with which indra led the dasyus to the nethermost
heaven. when the gods went to the world of heaven, the quarters were in confusion; they saw these
hundred years and has a hundred powers; verily he rests on life and power. this is a pipe with
and, being young for evermore, as sisters, speak to each other names that are united.
to thee, illuminer of night, o agni, day by day with prayer,
distributes, skilled in sacrifice, his precious things, invoking priest, immortal god.
nasatyas, with your winged sterds came nigh, and gave him strength to win.
thou shinest brightly forth, thou burnest to bestow: pervading sacrifice, thou lendest us thine help.
11 well-armed, impetuous in their haste, they deck themselves, their forms, with oblations: to you, the
as such, o bhaga, all with might invoke thee: as such be thou our champion here, o bhaga.
with strength let mitra, varuna swell oblations; do thou prepare for us rich food, o indra!
7 may waters be available for our crops. may waters be available for growing medicinal herbs which
with horses brown of hue that flew with swift wings ye brought back bhujyu from the sea of billows.
thou, indra, praised by divodasa's clansmen, as heaven grows great with days, shalt wax in glory.
to you at sacrifice the kanvas send the prayer: graciously listen to their call.
he puts down the naturally perforated brick; the naturally perforated brick is this (earth); verily he puts
the gostoma; verily by it they find support in the atmosphere. they perform thirdly the ayustoma;
him these our songs of praise, him, agni, we extol: his powers shine out preeminent.
share. he throws it away thrice; these worlds are three; verily he excludes him from these worlds. he
5 hath he not, purified, impregned the kine whb long to meet their lord,
4 may mornings as they spring to life, protect me, and may the rivers as they swell preserve me.
12 making his body beautiful, agni the sage hath waxen by
brihaspati, the descendant of angiras, and the seers, inspired by (our) song, did fix the three-jointed
by thee do mortal men give sweetness to their drink. bright art thou born, the embryo of the plants of
the men enkindle agni in his threefold seat, ensign of sacrifice, the earliest bousehold-priest.
he by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield the precious meed as to a victor.
having sacrificed with a verse addressed to visnu, he approaches the post. the post has visnu for its
bolt, the portions of the oblation are a bolt , the vasat call is a bolt; thus forges be a threefold bolt and
5 when the law's lovers mounted and ap. proached me as 1 sate lone upon the dear sky's summit.
supposed to be spoken by the disciple who has overheard the conversation, but its connexion with the
with promptest aid they come at morn and evening, the worshipper's most blessed guards from
urged by the sage upon his way, this god speeds forward to the: vats,
freedom from sin may aditi vouchsafe us: the steed with our oblations gain us lordship!
17 him sages longing for his aid, with offerings brought in eager haste,
they with their songs cleft e'en the mountain open and willingly disclosed the stall of cattle.
whether thou hast been prepared by the gods, or hast been prepared by men, we lead thee back with the help
where lie, then, all the sacred logs of agni that lead him god-ward, varuna and mitra?
chant we a hymn to agni while we go to sacrifice, to him
win thou the waters day by day, thralls of the strong.
viçvamitra and jamadagni had a feud with vasistha; jamadagni saw these vihavya (bricks); he put
yea, cause our hymn to gain for us cattle and steeds and store of wealth,
6 soon as the holy beings had discovered the thrice-seven mystic things contained within thee,
(place) the raksases infest the sacrifice. in that he takes of the vahantis, that part of the sacrifices lies
the joinings the months, the limbs the seasons, the trunk the year, the hair the rays (of the gun), the form
those that debate against us, render them devoid of force, o plant!
n. n. from these quarters, from this sky'; verily having acquired these worlds of his foe he descends
then all the maruts who were gathered with dice there extolled, o mighty one, thy powerful majesty.
makes an offering of the portion of the oblation with the jusana formula; by that means he supports those
even from far away come thou unto our feast, or listen if already here.
what are the teeth of god that arjun is referring to? he mentioned them in the previous verse as well. we use our teeth to grind our food. god’s teeth are his force of destruction that grinds everyone to death with the passage of time. the american poet, h.w. longfellow wrote:though the mills of god grind slowly,yet they grind exceeding small;though with patience he stands waiting,with exactness grinds he all [v9]arjun sees the great kaurava generals—bheeshma, dronacharya, and karn—and also many of the pandava generals rushing headlong into the mouth of the lord, to be ground between his teeth. he is beholding the imminent future in the cosmic form of god. since god is beyond the limits of time, so the past, present, and future are visible within him in the present.bheeshma, the grandsire of the kauravas and the pandavas, was the son of shantanu and ganga. to facilitate his father’s wish for remarriage, bheeshma renounced his right to the throne, and also took a lifelong vow of celibacy. however, bheeshma had continued to support duryodhan, despite knowing very well that he was evil and was usurping the right of the pandavas. thus, he was destined to die in this war of goodness versus evil. the śhrīmad bhāgavatam describes bheeshma’s prayer to the lord, when he lay on the bed of arrows at the end of his life:sapadi sakhi-vacho niśhamya madhye nija-parayor balayo rathaṁ niveśhyasthitavati para-sainikāyur akṣhṇā hṛitavati pārtha-sakhe ratir mamāstu (1.9.35)[v10]“let my mind meditate upon arjun’s dear pal, shree krishna, who obeyed his friend’s command to drive the chariot to the center of the two armies, and while there, he shortened the lifespan of the opposing generals by his mere glance.” so, bheeshma himself was aware that the consequence of fighting against the supreme lord shree krishna would be death.dronacharya was the guru of martial arts for both the kauravas and the pandavas. he was so impartial that he taught more about military science to arjun than even to his son, ashwatthama. however, he felt obliged to help duryodhan because he was financially dependent upon him for his maintenance. thus, dronacharya too was destined to die in the war. yet, his heroism could be judged from the fact that when the pandavas were unable to slay him by any means and approached him for help, he told them the way in which he could be killed.karn was the bosom friend of duryodhan and so he fought from the side of the kauravas. he too had heroic qualities. when shree krishna disclosed to him he was the eldest son of kunti and the pandavas were actually his brothers, he asked shree krishna not to disclose this secret to yudhisthir, or else he would stop trying to kill karn and would lose the war. since karn had taken the side of duryodhan in the war, he too was destined to die.
3 thou hast disclosed the kine's stall for the angirases, and made a way for atri by a hundred doors.
he whom the gods have made a gladdening draught to drink, the drop most sweet to taste, wealbringing, red of hue.
9 i have declared this speech of adoration to mightiest pusan and victorious vayu,
7 soma, bring down the foeman's might, his vigorous strength and vital powe'r,
19 when yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows from udders pour their milk,
food; therefore with the right (hand) is food eaten. 'support, the twenty-onefold', (with these words he
ekastaka. the ekastaka is the wife of the year; on that night he dwells with her; verily they consecrate
5 forth from mid air with light he dravc the darkness, as the gale blows a lily from the fiver.
9 thou, called on as sarasvati by fathers who come right forward to our solemn service,
bristle thou up, o maghavan, our weapons: excite the spirits, of my warring heroes!
16 let the milch-kine that have no calves storm downward, yielding rich nectar, streaming,
at the trikadrukas the great and strong enjoyed the barley-brew. with vishnu did he drink the
as thou, o mightier yet. didst shine for satyatravas, vayya's son, high-born! delightful with thy steeds!
manner of angiras, o pan; may the wives, the goddesses, connected with the all-gods, prepare thee on
18 by this our prayer be thou, o agni, strengthened, prayer made by us after our power and
when he was kindled, through his power and majesty his fiery splendour made the heavens and earth
brilliant. 'thou didst come thundering from thy mothers', he says; his mothers are the plants; verily from
yea, heaven and earth have not surpassed this youthful one in glorious fame.
creator with the bull; bountiful through the sacrifice; heavenly through the sacrificial fee; slayer of
praised god! the glad priest brings his heart's devotion; the holy youth presents twofold oblation.
grant us, o aditi and ye adityas, all of one mind, your manifold protection.
to win every kind of food. he offers with an offering-spoon of udumbara wood; the udumbara is
none, varuna and mitra, harins the mortal, man who honours and obeys your laws.
18 the gods seek him who presses out the soma; they desire not sleep
sacrifice. he makes the offering after crossing over without coming back; verily he drives away his foes
his consort sasvati with joy addressed him, now art thou well, my lord, and shalt be happy.
3 whose blaze most splendid, sovran in the forest, shines waxing on his way like the - impeller.
rite) is of fourteen nights, there are seven domesticated plants and seven wild; (verily it serves) to win
that it be well with friends and those who praise thee, and, savitar, with the loud-lauding singer.
four; verily from the quarters he wins splendour . there is an agnistoma with the trivrt (stoma);
he that drinks thee lives; (that) person thou dost preserve. for thou art the supporter of all successive
3 they make their way to indra and exalt him, bim whom no prayers and no laudations trouble;
we set out?' he says; there indeed is the sacrifice placed , where the brahman is; where the sacrifice is
delighted with soma, thee whom i have gladdened with soma. may i be possessed of fair offspring with
5 let the strong maruts hear him, him surpassing all men: strength be his
2 white-hued and thundering he dwells in splendour, most youthful, with the loudvoiced and eternalano bhadraha kritavayo yantu vishwataha (let noble thoughts come from every side) – rg veda
4 then indra at a single draught drank the contents of thirty pails,
37 what thing i truly am i know not clearly: mysterious, fettered in my mind i wander.
may your most recent favour turn to us again. come quickly, ye who fain would drink.
days; verily is he propagated. to them the adityas said, 'ye have been propagated; let us be
final bath, varuna is in the waters; verily straightway he appeases varuna. after his return he should
with hymns may i turn hither indra to mine aid,-the car which like a strong steed hasteth to the call.
5 agni and soma, joined in operation ye have set up the shining lights in heaven.
should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to indra, repeller of foes; verily he has recourse to indra, repeller
instigated by savitr, he purifies him. he says, 'o lord of the purifier, with thy purifier, for whatsoever i
t the raksas is cleared away, the evil spirits are cleared away.
of the adityas, of the maruts the mighty host-the voice hath ascended of the gods
may we, with indra and the gods to aid us, bring these existing worlds to full completion!
4 indra and agni, we invoke you both, as such, to send your cars:
call. the puronuvakya has three feet; these worlds are three; verily he finds support in these worlds. the
are drawn to save the self of the sacrificer; verily he wins expiration with the first, inspiration by the
these songs of mine go forth as lauds of agni, the disposing sage,
.71 sukta 71 – brahmanical prayer at the receipt of gifts
wise asura, thou king of wide dominion, loosen the bonds of sins by us committed.
space-filler is unexhausted, for yonder aditya is unexhausted . to them the seers said, 'let us come
the priest calls out, the sacrificer shows his skill, the asura tries his strength, and with the hymn is
where the hostile weapon now rises against us, threatening to slay, there do we place the two arms of indra
lower; this is the grave fashion; he for whom he sets it up thus swiftly dies. for him who desires the
downward the milch-cow pours her milk: so downward go thy pain and grief.
help us achieve our desires through the straight (sinless) path, and make our daily work joyful.
he who, just born, chief god of lofty spirit by power and might became the gods' protector,
2 great in tby power and wisdom, strong, with thought that comprehendeth all
ye are overlords by name; your houses are above; your arrows are the rain; the helper, &c.
so offering to you this draught of soma, i make you this new hymn, indra and agni,
old age impairs the beauty of our bodies. let husbands still come near unto their spouses.
7 that man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in the fight,
he, o god sûrya, that to-day passes between thee and me, upon him our evil dream, our foulness, and our
in this last chapter, shree krishna repeats many of the principles he has already explained. in the beginning of this chapter, he explained to arjun that merely running away from the responsibilities of life is not sanyās, nor is it renunciation. now he describes the state of actionlessness, or naiṣhkarmya-siddhi. this state can be reached even amidst the flow of the world by detaching ourselves from events and outcomes, and simply focusing on doing our duty. this is just as water flowing under a bridge enters from one side and flows out from the other. the bridge is neither the recipient of the water nor its distributor; it remains unaffected by its flow. likewise, the karm yogis do their duty, but keep the mind unaffected by the stream of events. they do not neglect putting in their best efforts in doing their duty, as an act of worship to god, but they leave the final outcome in his hands, and are thus contented and undisturbed with whatever happens. here’s a simple story to illustrate this point. a man had two daughters; the first was married to a farmer and the second was married to a brick kiln owner. one day, the father rang up the first daughter and inquired how she was doing. she replied, “father, we are going through economic hardships. please pray to god for us that we may have plentiful rains in the coming months.” he then rang up the second daughter, and she requested, “father, we are low on funds. please request god not to send rains this year, so that we may have lots of sunshine and a good production of bricks.” the father heard the opposite requests of his daughters, and thought, “god alone knows what is best. let him do what he feels is best.” such acceptance of the will of god brings detachment from outcomes, despite being immersed in the incessant stream of events in the world.
14 pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty at the gods' banquet, pour the rain of
3 may the most glorious fathers aid us, and the two goddesses, mothers of the gods, who strengthen
23 the waters i this day have sought, and to their moisture have we come:
15 that hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both worlds apart,
13 this day may all the maruts, all he near us with aid: may all our fires be well enkindled.
4 whate'er we speak this day to thee, wise, wondrous god whom many praise,
11 may we increase the laud and gain us vigour: come to our song, ye whom one chariot carries.
with their own share; verily they make parjanya rain for him by day and night. to agni, hiding his
place he should stroke with this formula; verily he appropriates the force, might, power, strength,
guardian, to food as bowman: do ye guard it for us, until we arrive. to the goal here, &c.
the mighty child who glides along the sacred grass, the undecaying youth set in the midst of plants.
worship the gods with most devoted spirit, a priest with no unfriendly thought, o agni.
and another 3500 hymns from the paippalada atharvaveda samhita edition plus another 2500 from
6 thine are two measures, indra, wide-wellmeted, heaven for thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom.
6 1, i crushed navavastva of the lofty car, the dasa, as the vrtra-slayer kills the fiends;
to whom as leader of the song, resplendent, worthy of lauds, both gods and mortals listen.
21 the man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial gifts
a teacher may know the deepest secret, but he does not necessarily reveal it to the student. before sharing it, he considers many things, such as the preparedness of the student to receive it, comprehend it, benefit from it, etc. in the beginning of the bhagavad gita, arjun was bewildered by the problems facing him and asked for guidance from shree krishna. the lord enlightened him with great care and consideration, uplifting his understanding a little by little, through the eighteen chapters. having seen arjun receive the message so well, shree krishna now feels confident that he will be able to grasp the final and most profound knowledge as well. further, he says iṣhṭo ‘si me dṛiḍhamiti, meaning, “i am speaking this to you because you are my very dear friend. so i care for you deeply and sincerely desire your best interest.”
a depth extended in the front: a passage out was made behind.
the piling, he prepares its body and mounts it; the sacrificer thus prepares his body, in that he piles
becomes better for him who has so sacrificed. what the gods did at the sacrifice, the asuras did. the
what laws we have infringed upon, with the eye, the mind, and speech, either while awake, or asleep-may
closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, beneath your arms.
12 what is our wealth therefrom, and what our treasure? tell us o jatavedas, for thou
'he indeed would take the steps of visnu who after acquiring these worlds of his foe should descend
10 winner of kine, indu, art thou, winner of heroes, steeds, and strength
there are the dawn and night, the grand and beauteous pair, earth, heaven, and varuna, mitra,
may he, implored, fulfil the prayer for plenty of him who worships, of the living mortal.
4 loving us well, benevolent, close beside us, drink, godlike indra, of the wellpressed soma.
hitherward have the somas streamed, the drops while they are purified:
2 the richly-coloured dawns have mounted eastward, like pillars planted at our sacrifices,
with thine assistance, o thou mighty indra, be it the least, the midmost, or the highest,great with those aids and by these powers support us, strong god! in battle that subdues our foemen.
two receptacles of the brâhmanam (brahmanic life). these the brahmakârin protects by his tapas (creative
filterindu rejoicing in the love of indra, the god who gladdens, for the god's enjoyment.
flow on, o thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy beloved form,
reverence be to thy ploughs, reverence to thy wagon-poles and yokes! may the plant, destructive of kshetriya,
the twenty-twofold; maintenance, the twenty-threefold; the womb, the twenty-fourfold; the embryo, the
3 do thou, most youthful god, protect the men who offer, hear their songs,
12 they deck the gold-hued infant, newlyborn, even soma, indu, in the sieve for gods.
fain would i win my friend to kindly friendship. so may the sage, come through the air's wide
firm (plants) that bear a thousand names, the healing (plants), shall be brought hither!
stump; therefore many (shoots) spring up from the stump of trees. 'may we grow with a thousand
sacrificer is the pañcadaça; the sacrificer the ekavimça, the sacrificer the trayastrinça, and the others
swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even tarkshya for our weal will we call hither.
for thee, the strong, i yoke thy strong bay horses: may our prayers reach thee and win strength, most
along; for distinction. 'thou art the share of the raksases ', (with these words) he casts the strew, having
some people think that action refers only to professional work, and not to daily activities such as eating, drinking, sleeping, waking and thinking. so when they renounce their profession, they think they are not performing actions. but shree krishna considers all activities performed with the body, mind, and tongue as actions. hence, he tells arjun that complete inactivity is impossible even for a moment. if we simply sit down, it is an activity; if we lie down, that is also an activity; if we fall asleep, the mind is still engaged in dreaming; even in deep sleep, the heart and other bodily organs are functioning. thus shree krishna declares that for human beings inactivity is an impossible state to reach, since the body-mind-intellect mechanism is compelled by its own make-up of the three guṇas (sattva, rajas, and tamas) to perform work in the world. the śhrīmad bhāgavatam contains a similar verse:na hi kaśhchit kṣhaṇam api jātu tiṣhṭhaty akarma-kṛitkāryate hy avaśhaḥ karma guṇaiḥ svābhāvikair balāt (6.1.53)[v1]“nobody can remain inactive for even a moment. everyone is forced to act by their modes of nature.”
gavatri hath, they say, three brands for kindling: hence it excels in majesty and vigour.
2 he flows beholding on his way all wellbeloved sacred lore,
5 this soma i address that is most near us, that which hath been imbibed within the spirit,
may all the gods come over: the oblation is pleasing to trishamdhi. adhere to the great compact under which
and places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice,-these through my spirit's fervid glow have i
10 even thence, o 1ndra, come to us with food that gives a hundred powers,
2 the strong steers, gathering, have duly stirred themselves,and over the stream's wave the friends
they give delight, they spread abroad, they move themselves continually. bring food to those who sing
(that he may come) to us, let us honour with obeisance glory-owning indra, the glorious one with glory-yielding
atmosphere metro, sky metre, seasons metre, naksatras metre, mind metre, speech metre, ploughing
n hail! with my mind the sacrifice (i grasp); hail! from heaven and earth, bail! from the broad
may dyaus the lord of lauded wealth, and earth stand by the man who offers sacrifice,
body is the twenty first; he thus completely purifies the man . he says, 'let the lord of thought purify
verily with the jagati he wins cattle for him. eight each he puts down in the other altars; cattle have
hero, lord of the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with vrtra, or for waters, or for spoil.
come, priest, and of the savoury juice pour forth a yet more gladdening draught:
what brings thee forth is even this. now come, subandhu, get thee forth.
mix the oblations, then come hither with the meath, and drink the soma, ye rich in abundant strength.
ten hundred stood together: there i looked on this the most marvellous deities' one chief glory.
10 god! may we conquer poverty by removing ignorance. may we conquer hunger by being
send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us when thou art cleansed, what earth containeth,
18 come as the laws of heaven ordain, varuna, mitra, void of guile:
9 since thou, god tvastar, hast made beauty perfect, since hou hast been the angirases' companion,
the house, the sadas, the cakes, the cooked (offerings), the final bath, the cry of 'godspeed' (prosper for
one of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, the other smites and slays resistless foemen.
24 with gayatri he measures out the praise-song, sama with praise-song, triplet with the tristup.
so, lord of affluent gifts, this juice hath been expressed for thee with strength:
r with thy dread countenance guard me, agni; content me; hurt me not.
they come with treasures, having heard (thy fame). for they know (thee to be) the destroyer of the takman.
3 within the range of their surpassinq power, by might, the gods created agni with inventive thought.
the overlords. they praised with twenty-one, the whole-hooved cattle were created, varuna was the
power. in that agni when established does not prosper, (it is that he is) desiring a greater portion; in that
13 maruts, the man whom ye have guarded with your help, he verily in strength surpasseth all mankind.
asuras away from these worlds. the observance of the upasads is for the driving away of foes. one
wood, for that is heavenly. they should have wheels, for gaining the world of heaven. the sacrificial
serves) to win prajapati . whatever the gods did in the sacrifice, the asuras did; the gods perceived
they in courageous might still waxing boldly have compassed round their foemen like an ocean.
15 agni, the man who giveth guerdon to the priests, like well-sewn armour thou guardest on every side.
24, 25. the brahmakârin carries the shining brahma: into this all the gods are woven. producing in-breathing and
kadru and suparni had a dispute (for the stake of) each other's form. kadru defeated suparni. she said,
6 drink, indra and brhaspati, the soma in the giver's house:
though mortal men on every side invoke thee, still give thine ear to us, o all-impeller.
ye sun and moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and with your thought, o earth and sky,
the highest might to-day is yours, the vasits': come ye, as many as ye are, one-minded.
when i have seen you, matuts, in gay splendour, ye have delighted me, so now delight me.
the race of kine is thy gift, pavarridna: when born thou madest surya rich with brightness.
accordant came with strength to jahnu's children who offered you thrice every day your portion.
l protect me in front, protect me at the side, protect me from behind; from the quarters protect me; from
with three syllables won the three worlds; soma with four syllables won four-footed cattle; pusan with
the speaker, unassailable master of this prayer, the tongue of sacrifice, pours forth the pleasant
ye, when ye bring to singer and the rite, enjoy the sacrifice periormed with holy praise and strength.
k thou art the right arm of indra, the fence of the sacrificer, praised and to be praised.
wonderful, with your golden paths, most gracious, bringers of the flood. lovers of sweetness, hear my
tawny-coloured, for skill, for strength, for increase of wealth, for good heroes.
o agni, make them turn hither to succour us. give strength, and win it for thyself.
15 and may he. duly bring to me the six bound closely, through these drops,
the strong hath loosed his bolt with the swift rush of rain, and he hath rent in pieces susna's firm-built
13 do not play with dice. till your land and rejoice in your income and property so obtained, feeling
who kindles thee devoutly in his dwelling,to him be wealth secure and freely giving.
5 that chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of gold,
4 i bring, as 'twere, the longed-for milk, the dear milk of the sister-pair.
thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced.
finder of room and freedom, flow for indra whom we must adore,
those on the south bharadvaja, with those on the west viçvamitra, with those on the north jamadagni,
hymns call anew the chariot-borne, eternal: by eloquence men gain abundant riches.
he, most heroic, hath his home with splendour, with glory and with riches and with valour.
how, with them, she though firm, strong-minded, haughty, travels to women happy in their fortune.
7 thou from the stake didst loose e'en sunahsepa bound for a thousand; for he prayed with fervour.
(agni) has shouted loud: may he here well perform his work! spread thyself out, o agni, over the far-reaching
that, splendid, chasing sickness, slaying demons, it may delight our friend and bless the singers.
for him, like loving friends, the maruts bringing bliss bedew the regions round with milk abundantly.
2 may your pure steeds, rain-drinkers, bring you hither, swift as the tempest, your celestial coursers,
3 o indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughter us:
the gods, having fixed up a place of sacrifice, could not distinguish the quarters. they ran up to one
this warrior, o indra, do thou strengthen for me, do thou install this one as sole ruler (bull) of the vis (the
12 may rudra and sarasvati, accordant, visnu and vayu, pour down gifts and bless us;
4 what time the guest hath made himself apparent, at ease reclining in the rich man's dwelling,
3 the foolish, faithless, rudely-speaking niggards, without belief or sacrifice or worship,far far sway hath agni chased those dasytis, and, in the cast, hath turned the godless westward.
against his cattle. the sacrificer is a bolt, the enemy of man is hunger; in that he fasts without eating, he
like a woman this bowstring twangeth stretched over the bow ,
lightning; when it moves about, there is thundering; when it makes water, there is rain; its speech is
b in the seat of agni whose home is abiding i set you down, kindly
with him loud-roaring, ever watchful victcr, bold, hard to overthrow, rouser of battle,
thus offers the five-night rite is distinguished from the enemy that hates him. sarvaseni çauceya desired,
him who is lord of horses, lord of kine,of floods, to indra, to the holy bring sweet soma juice.
they know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. hear, one and all, the truth as i declare it.
varuna., mitra, from the stronger mortal. gods, which of you at sacrifice giveth comfort?
me a share in the sacrifice, and i will not have designs against your cattle. he poured out for him the
i would support the singer, god who scatterest wealth! and not abandon him to woe.
them down, and with them he appropriated the power and strength of vasistha; in that he puts down the
they are like steeds who come into the race-course, those men who call aloud on indra-agni.
2 our sires with lauds burst e'en the firmset fortress, yea, the angirases, with roar, the mountain.
11 he, king of kings, the glory of the floods, o'er all that liveth hath resistless sway.
may pusan guard us from misfortune, us that prosper holy order
whereby with all their flood, the lucid rivers fill not one sea wherein they pour their waters.
d from the ocean, o maruts, ye make (the rain) to start,
success attends him in the shout of battle. he makes a friend of him in future troubles.
drive far away these kanvas, the effacers of life! where the dark regions are, there have i made these flesheaters go.
long stood they there before the task was ended: thou wast the master of the foemen's treasure.
him who approveth himself homage. to the strength of the hotras hail! vat! to him who approveth
savitar hath stretched out his arms to cherish life, producing with his rays and lulling all that moves.
may this sacrificial ladle (sruk), the second hand of aditi, which the seven rishis, the creators of the beings,
6 sunk in the pit the rsi kutsa called, to aid, indra the vrtra-slayer, lord of power and might.
may indra, vibhvan, vaja, and rbhuksan destroy by turns the wicked foeman's valour.
when lauded for thyself, thou gavest freedom to sore-afflicted heaven and to the people.
he that wears this talisman, verily is a tiger, a lion as well, and, too, a bull; moreover a curtailer of enemies.
drive, vayu, bring thine harnessed horses hither: drink the pressed soma till it make thee joyful.
in the offering do thou teach thy comrades, o faithful one;
14 to visnu rich in marvels, songs and praises shall go as singers on the road of bhaga,the chieftain of the mighty stride, whose mothers, the many young dames, never disregard him.
middle it should be poured down', they say, for the middle one enjoys life; 'in the latter part it should be
the cow of the brahman, when roasted, as far as she reaches does she destroy the lustre of the kingdom; no
lightly, with piercing ends, as 'twere two ranks of heroes ranged for fight.
1 waken the asvin pair who yoke their car at early morn: may they
7 and that strong steed, victorious and faithful, obedient with his body in the combat,
4 o indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge us:
hotr would experience misfortune; if he were to offer it in the fire, he would give the cattle to rudra,
gifts. it is spotted, for it has savitr as its deity ; (verily it serves) for prosperity. he who desires food
22 the soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at hand,
flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager for the kine. o soma!
o purifying soma, bring to us the wondrous treasure, meet.
plants at the joints! they whose kingdom soma rules, the plants, shall not harbour anger against us!
associate with rjisvan indra overthrew the solid forts of pipru, conjuring asura.
this trta aptya knoweth well, and speaketh out for brotherhood. mark this my woe, ye earth and
c thou art barley (yava); bar (yavaya) from us foes, bar evil spirits.
.8.19 mantra 19: the propitiation of the quarters and offerings to the satyadatas
with black neck, and a brown (beast) to soma; the body of him whose illness is long goes to agni, the
of king soma; him, who knowing thus, places the pressing-stones on the agnidh's altar, the troop of
20 for he gave riches that surpass in greatness all the things of earth,
they have deceived themselves by their own speeches, uttering wicked words against the righteous.
the earth', (with these words) he offers in a boerhavia procumbens; this of plants is that which wins rain,
nearest vahantis; if he were to pass over the nearest vahantis, he would despise the sacrifice. he should
4 he, at his birth, whose path is black behind him, filled heaven and earth with far-apparent splendour:
is he to go to offer the sacrifices in the southern fire? because that is the end of the fires. but how are the
his force, might, consecration , and penance. 'do ye flowing waters place might (in me), place force,
on him that iron thunderbolt fell fiercely with its thousand points, lauding his own imperial sway.
11 come to the man's, the sacrificer's calling: hear, kings of immortality, joy-givers!
him; he, yoked, carries him to the world of heaven. if he were to yoke with all five together, his fire
with this well ordered sacrifice, well finished, do ye fill full the channels of the rivers.
3 we call upon that indra, who, most active, ever slays the foe:
dissolved, crushed, slain the enemy shall lie, o nyarbudi! may victorious sprites, with fiery tongues and
to you will i sing indra's praise who gives good gifts, as we i we know;
33 o vrtra-slayer, thou art he who drinks these drops of soma: come
make 'godspeed'. 'may we share thy limbs', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. of this (victim)
perforated is breath, the earless is life; verily he places breath and life as the highest of the breaths;
sacrificer with brilliance. he rubs it all around; verily he places brilliance in him completely. 'support
31 o indra, strong is this thy car, and strong are these bay steeds of thine:
the archer boldly shot at him his arrow, and the god threw his splendour on his daughter.
5 with teeth of flame, wind-driven, through the wood he speeds, triumphant like a bull among the herd
wins cattle for him. the brhati holds the sovereignty of the metres; he for whom these are put down
my mark at so far i shall not miss.' the adhvaryu taking the agrayana, commencing the sacrifice, utters
cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling: indu hath flowed with milk and with the waters.
9 here, api, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee as their priest in sacred gatherings,
within the garhapatya much variegated work is performed; with two verses to agni, the purifier, he
far from the floor of heaven in all directions, the ancient riteless ones fled to destruction.
the internal disease that has set in, that crumbles the bones, and crumbles the joints, every balâsa do thou
6 the man who sits, the man who walks, and whosoever looks on us,
'restrainer'; the eye (with) 'the gliding'; the ear (with) 'the bestower of strength'. now these offspring,
5 may he support in peace and win in battle: he masters both the hosts that meet together.
that in thy strength, o thunderer, thou hast struck down vrtra from the floods, lauding thine own
with man's measure he metes out; man is commensurate with the sacrifice; verily he metes him with a
v by sacrifice to the god indra, may i be powerful.
thou, by his side, for young and glorious kutsa, with steed and car in battle slewest susna,
thus perform (the rite of) thirty-three days, mount openly upon the deities. as a great man who has
2 for unto thee, o angiras, o son of strength, move ladles in the sacrifice.
far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away.
splendour. the one with a black neck is for agni; verily he drives away the darkness from him: it is
him; he makes the yajya and the puronuvakya of the çakvari (metre); the çakvari is the thunderbolt, the
as the wild animals of the forest start in fear from man, thus do thou, o drum, shout against the enemies,
the section of this verse—neither rejoicing in pleasure, nor lamenting the unpleasant—is the highest ideal of the vipassanā tradition of meditation in buddhism. rigorous training is undertaken to reach this state of clarity and precision, ultimately leading to equanimity, and destruction of self-will. however, the same state is naturally reached in devotion to god, when we surrender our will to the divine. in accordance with verse 5.17, when we unite our will to the will of god, then both pleasure and pain are serenely accepted as his grace.a beautiful story illustrates this attitude. a wild horse once ran into a farm. people congratulated the farmer on his good luck. he said, “good luck, bad luck, who knows? it is all the will of god.” a few days later, the horse ran away, back into the forest. his neighbors commiserated with his bad luck. he said, “bad luck, good luck, who knows? it is all god’s will.” a few more days went by, and the horse returned with twenty more wild horses. again people congratulated the farmer on his stroke of good luck. he wisely reflected, “what is good and bad luck? this is all god’s will.” a few days later, the farmer’s son broke his leg while riding one of the horses. the neighbors came to express grief. the wise farmer responded, “pleasant and unpleasant, it is only god’s will.” some more days went by, and the king’s soldiers came to recruit all young men into the army for the war that had just broken out. all the young men in the neighborhood were taken into the army, but the farmer’s son was left behind because his leg was broken.divine knowledge brings the understanding that our self-interest lies in giving pleasure to god. this leads to surrender to the will of god, and when the self-will gets merged in the divine will, one develops the equanimity to serenely accept both pleasure and pain as his grace. this is the symptom of a person situated in transcendence.
whatever, maruts! may be difficult to gain, grant us, whate'er is hard to gain.
4 thinking of thee, o joyous one, as her who driveth hate away,
be victorious like a king; thou rulest within without a foe.
the sacrifice, enjoying long life', he says; verily he confers long life upon himself and attains security
agni departed from the gods, desiring a portion; the gods said to him, 'come back to us, carry the
aryaman, bhaga, all whose thoughts are faithful: hither i call the bright who share in common.
for riches famous agni, purumilha and ye men! agni to light our dwelling well.
t there hath come into being this might of all the world,
mitra art thou, the sender of true blessings: thou and king varuna be both my helpers.
she travels perfectly the path of order, nor fails to reach, as one who knows, the quarters.
this agni guards with care that never ceases the sonia's skin, the bird's place rich in fatness.
to thee have streameld the songs or mighty singers, imploring, indra, drink of our libation.
rivers are ye with wings that fly: keep far whatever brings disease.
composed of twenty-one parts; (verily they serve) to obtain man. the man's head is impure as bereft of
may indra, lord of bay steeds, fair-helmed thunderer, act at his pleasure, as he lists.
the libation (as a whole) is the ninth; verily he extends the threefold (stoma) at the beginning of the
15 bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in thousands, source
3 i laud thee jatavedas, thee lord of all blessings, with my song.
now, now must bhaga be invoked by mortals, lord of great riches who distributes treasures.
having raised him with day and night he supports him with the breaths. sitting he puts (it) on;
5 the men have decked him both at eve and morning, most youthful agni, as they tend a courser.
indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effecteth much. supreme is indra over all.
h he doth put down the wise contrivings of every worshipper;
2 they who with laud extol the ancient statutes, when they shine forth infallible dividers,
6 refreshing is your voice, o mitra-varuna: parjanya sendeth out a wondrous mighty voice.
which his two tawny coursers draw, then indra is the sovran lord of power whose glory spreads afar.
ye to whom belongs all that is near by, yea, all that is far; ye who are known as the most skilful archers among
6 now lying far away, child of two mothers, he wanders unrestrained, the single youngling.
4 pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal lords,
swa-dharma is the prescribed duties based upon our guṇas and station in life. performing them ensures that we use the potential abilities of our body and mind in a constructive and beneficial manner. this leads to purification and growth, and is auspicious for the self and society. and since the prescribed duties are in accordance with our innate qualities, we feel comfortable and stable in discharging them. then, as we enhance our competence, the swa-dharma also changes and we step into the next higher class. in this manner, we keep advancing by dutifully executing our responsibilities.
the teacher fashioned these two hern spheres of the world, the broad and the deep, earth and heaven. these
11 guarded by ahi stood the thralls of dasas, the waters stayed like kine held by the robber.
14 come unto us with riches, come with wealth in horses and in kine.
the gods said to mitra, 'let us slay soma, the king'; he replied, 'not i; for i am the friend of all'; they
then straight the mountains clothe them in the rain-cloud: the heroes, putting forth their vigour, loose
his own quarter. he sprinkles it twice, to make it divided into four. the former offerings are cattle, agni
bow down before the rsis of the ancient times, who made this path in days of old.
having made thee (the poison) that comes from a horizontal direction into a porridge, rich in fat, and cheering,
5 be this our ancient bond of friendship with you and with angirases here who speak of vala.
mark thou the man who injures us and kill him like the heavenly bolt.
aditya vivasvant with the soma drink. 'with the rain of the sky i mix thee', (with these words) he
given she is a thousand. therefore one must not accept a boon; for she is a boon; verily he would be
i laud with newest songs the righteous people, mitra and varuna who make us happy.
10 agni and soma, unto him who worships you with holy oil
right here, do thou, o house, stand firmly, full of horses, full of cattle, full of abundance! full of sap, ful.] of
8 we may have committed sins against friends and family members.
men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into the rivers from their bands.
do ye taste, accept it, rejoice in it, o ye strong ones
9 to you in praise of sweetness sang the honey-bee: ausija calleth you in soma's rapturous joy.
6 for fertile fields, for worthy sons and grandsons, for the sun's beauty and for steer-like vigour,
ye drave away, ye put to death the foemen, and took great vengeance with your murdering weapons.
should offer to the all-gods (a beast) of many forms; food is connected with the all-gods; verily he has
3 the two who show their vigour, night and morning, by the wind's paths shall haste to thee o agni.
when indra, joying in the draughts of soma juice, forced the clouds, slaying vrtra stayer of their flow.
17 the turbid darkness fled, the heaven was sp, endid! up rose the bright beam of celestial morning.
wherewith thou holpest bhrgu and the yatis and praskanva when the prize was staked.
7 the stones press out the soma, swift as car-borne men, and, eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap
he, son of strength, the holy, from a distance hath spread himself abroad with light like surya.
12 to him adorable, sage, strong and mighty we have sung forth our song of praise and homage.
the arrow, winged with longing, barbed with love, whose shaft is undeviating desire, with that, well-aimed,
make me go to a secure place, with offspring and cattle, let wealth again visit me', (he says); verily she
strengthening (bricks); verily he makes concord for him with cattle and he becomes possessed of cattle.
7 slavelike may i do service to the bounteous, serve, free from sin, the god inclined to anger.
should offer a brown (beast) to soma; food is connected with soma; verily he has recourse to soma with
swa-dharma is one’s duty as an individual, in accordance with the vedas. there are two kinds of swa-dharmas, or prescribed duties for the individual—para dharma, or spiritual duties, and apara dharma, or material duties. considering oneself to be the soul, the prescribed duty is to love and serve god with devotion. this is called para dharma. however, since a vast majority of humankind does not possess this spiritual perspective, the vedas also prescribe duties for those who see themselves as the body. these duties are defined according to one’s āśhram (station in life), and varṇa (occupation). they are called apara dharma, or mundane duties. this distinction between spiritual duties and material duties needs to be kept in mind while understanding the bhagavad gita and the vedic philosophy at large.by occupation, arjun was a warrior, and so his occupational duty as a warrior was to fight for the protection of righteousness. shree krishna is calling this swa-dharma, or prescribed duty at the bodily level.
class was created, indra was the overlord. they praised with seventeen, cattle were created, brhaspati
20 now, as the bhrgus wrought a car, for indra the strong, the mighty, we our prayer have fashioned,
ye send the fighter hand to hand, armmighty, and the brave hero, maruts with good horses.
flow onward, soma, as a mighty sea, as father of the gods, to every form.
bringers of bliss to him who lauds and praises, bestowing varied bounties on the singer.
delight us with thy bounty rich in pleasantness, o indra, with abundant wealth.
compass this house to keep it from the foeman, that none may force it, either near or distant.
.2.9 mantra 9: the taking of the soma to the hall
sable is thy hiding-place, sable thy dwelling-place, sable art thou, o plant: drive away from here the speckled
3 yea, the broad waters swell their flood ior him: of him strong heroes think amid their foes.
so he here seeks his portion; if he were not to offer a libation to him, he would suck the adhvaryu and
6 these somas passing through the fleecy filter, like rain descending from the clouds of heaven,
4 they, verily, were also human beings whom thou wast wont to hear, those earlier sages.
as bhaga, lord of men! thou rulest over wealth, and guardest in his house him who hath served thee
world of heaven. they surround it from above with the para (samans), and descend with the prsthas. if
thou', (with these words) he pays reverence; verily he awakens him; therefore after sleeping creatures
5 asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, regard the many prayers which rsis offer.
brilliant with ukthas, soma joined anustup: brhaspati's voice by brhati was aided.
. in that it is on eight potsherds, it is connected with agni; in that it is of panic seeds, it is connected
he, when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy oil, the offered fatness, longeth for it with his glow.
in indra are all creatures closely held; in him meet the distilling soma-drops.
9 and she, the young, the joyous-spirited, divulged the path to syava, yea, to me.
offers on five potsherds; it should be made on eight potsherds; the gayatri has eight syllables, agni is
urged on, the father of the earth and heaven hath gone forth like a car to gather booty,
like as the household herdsman guards the cattle, so move thou round about us in the combat.
for unto you the drops proceed as waters gather to the vale.
so loose thou too his thought who hath effused the sap, and let the stones which we are honouring be
fumigate thee with the tristubh metre, in the manner of angiras; may the adityas fumigate thee with the
1 speak forth three words, the words which light precedeth, which milk this udder that produceth
young agni, who with conquering strength subduing the tribes of nahus made them bring their tribute.
6 with hands that shed no blood, guarding the pious, whom, varuni3, ye save amid oblations.
5 meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive not, ofone mind, one with another.
for which, most potent! thou wouldst fain bless the man here who strives for fame.
that he eats the sacrificer's portion, he fills himself. the sacrifice is the size of the sacrificer's portion, the
3 he goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over the roaring sound which sarya's daughter loves.
when men adorn the ancient with oblations, these seek, as on two chariot-seats, the dwelling.
thence flows the imperishable flood and thence the universe hath life.
possessed of a (sure) foundation. the hymn called the ajya (çastra), that is the foundation of the cups;
with thine auspicious forms, o jatavedas, bear this man to the region of the pious.
what all the immortals have prepared with wisdom, dyaus, sire, begetter, raining down true blessings.
even here is he who, swift of course, hath with the river's wave rowed down.
6 fair wealth, o savitar, to-day, to-morrow, fair wealth produce for us each day that passes.
he looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between the eastern and the western limit.
5 what he hath longed for we have brought to indra, who from the days of old hath done us service.
the udumbara with strength, the gayatri with the metres, the trivrt with the stomas. b ye are helpers;
i am the man; you are the woman. i am the song; you are the lyric. i am the sky; you are the earth. we two
11 fathers whom agni's flames have tasted, come ye nigh: ye kindly leaders, take ye each your proper
to the trayastrinça. the gods are three and thirty; verily in the gods they find support. there is a
5 he who supports the worlds of life, he who well knows the hidden names mysterious of the morning
for the gods ; from us let the gods be sacrificed to.' therefore of the series of nights it is on the new
forth through the straining-cloth the sage flows to the banquet of the gods,
3 sure in the worlds he was a skilful craftsman, he who produced these twain the earth and heaven.
his expiration he finds support in yonder world, of expiration and inspiration he is not liable to be
the kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, the head and chief with milk within the vessels.
38 o soma, thou beholdest men from every side: o pavamana, steer, thou wanderest through these.
the drop of soma breaketh all the strongholds down, and indra is the rishis' friend.
(he recites) aloud, that is (the foundation) of the other cups; he who knows thus becomes possessed of a
2 and, o nasatyas, man's dear priest is seated, who brings to sacrifice and offers worship,
potsherds ; verily he led him to the top of the gods; he made as the yajya and the anuvakya (verses)
5 when, mighty one, lord of the brave, thou thinkest thus, i shall not die,
head divided. 'thou art the string of visnu; thou art the fixed point of visnu', he says, for the oblationholder is connected with visnu as its deity. now the knot which he first ties, if he were not to unloose it,
hero, to whom the prayer is brought, we praise thee as great for that wherein we know thee mighty.
(while yet) young its mother nourishes; this, as soon as born, surveys all the worlds.
ascends to heaven. in sixty autumns the treasurer (of the porridge) shall fetch it!
9 save us, o maruts, vasus, from the injurer, the mortal foe who makes us looked upon as wolves.
4 this thine own soma rich in meath, o indra, steer for the steer, hath flowed into the filter.
vaiçvanara. he puts down salt; salt is the nourishment and the propagating; verily he piles the fire in
to indra, 'thou art the strongest of us; let us hold on to thee.' he said, 'three are these forms of my own
rich in brave men art thou, soma, who winnest all: these holy singers wait upon thee with the song.
may the wind bring you good luck; and may the rivers bring you plenty of clear water for your health.
15 o thou most lofty one, accept our laud as nearest to thine heart.
thousand, he makes her the measure of a thousand . he offers to her forms; verily he unites her with
unites him with the waters and the plants. 'ye divine waters, this is thy foetus', he says; that is according
9 the virgins deck thee o'er fresh streams to drive thee to the sieve when thou,
5 now for our band, o maghavan, when lauded, make ample room with might, and grant us riches.
and may the waters, bright like castles, hear us, as they flow onward from the cloven mountain.
he in whose energy wise pusan marches, surveying all existence like a herdsman.
2 i stimulate thy zeal, the strong, the hero decking my song of praise forth; immortal.
3 young rudras, demon-slayers, never growing old, they have waxed, even as mountains, irresistible.
seasonal periods are seasonal periods. they are the children of the seasons, and therefore they are
speech; verily with speech he practises against him; the oblation is brhaspati's, brhaspati is the holy
4 the kinsman, agni, of mankind, their well beloved friend art thou,
when indra maghavan with those who followed him had smitten vrtra he deserved the choice of gods.
3 excellent pavamana, make the lights shine brightly out for us.
nest-like, bedewed with oil. bear this our worship to savitar who sacrifices rightly.
given: that, they say, guarantees the security of one's own property.
11 come hitherward to us with teams of horses, the highest and the midmost and the lowest.
5 the foolish brought the ne'er-bewildered forward, great, victor, song-inspirer, fort-destroyer.
his wealth who hath no store of kine hath ne'er found out recited laud,
strengthened by songs of praise thou rentest piecemeal the dasa, him who deemed himself immortal.
whom, passing wise, gods, heaven and earth, engendered, formed by a master's hand, to crush the
son born to him, verily is born to him a brilliant and resplendent son. 'this prayer i utter, bringing light
post is connected with all the gods; verily in setting up the post he delights all the gods. by means of the
s may that which is increased by the rain recognize thee.
ye, universal gods! are all-controllers: may he do harm unto himself who hates me.
he, lord of tawny coursers, lord of fleet-foot mares, will bear his bay steeds safely over all distress.
how can devotees be considered venerable, merely for having made the correct resolve? shree krishna explains that if they continue the process of exclusive devotion with unflinching faith in god, their hearts will become purified and they will swiftly develop saintly virtues.divine virtues emanate from god himself. he is perfectly just, truthful, compassionate, loving, merciful, etc. since we souls are his tiny parts, we are all naturally drawn to these godly qualities. but the process of becoming virtuous remains an elusive mystery. from childhood, we have heard that we must speak the truth, serve others, be free from anger, etc. and yet we are unable to put those teachings into practice for the simple reason that our mind is impure. without purification of the mind, blemishes of character cannot be eradicated fully and permanently. jagadguru shree kripaluji maharaj declares the irrefutable truth regarding developing divine virtues:satya ahinsā ādi mana! bina hari bhajana na pāyajala te ghṛita nikale nahīñ, koṭina kariya upāya (bhakti śhatak verse 35)“oil stains on a cloth cannot be removed by water, no matter how much we try. similarly, truthfulness, non-violence, and other virtuous qualities cannot be acquired without engaging in devotion to god.” these qualities manifest when the mind is purified; and the purification of the mind cannot take place without attaching it to the all-pure god.further, shree krishna asks arjun to boldly declare that his devotees will never perish. he does not say, “the jñānī (person of knowledge) will not be lost.” nor does he say, “the karmī (performer of rituals) shall not perish.” he makes his promise for his bhaktas (devotees), saying that “they shall never come to ruin.” thereby, he reiterates what he had stated in verse 9.22, that he personally carries the burden of maintaining those who depend upon him and engage in exclusive devotion unto him.it may seem intriguing why shree krishna asks arjun to make this statement, instead of declaring it himself? the reason is that under special circumstances the lord sometimes breaks his word, but he never permits his devotees’ word to be broken. for example, shree krishna had resolved that he would not lift weapons during the mahabharat war. but when bheeshma, considered the perfect devotee, resolved that he would either kill arjun by sunset the next day or make the lord lift weapons to protect him, shree krishna broke his own vow to protect the vow made by bheeshma. thus, to reaffirm the strength of his statement, shree krishna here says, “arjun, you declare that my devotee will never perish, for i shall guarantee that your word will be kept.”
2 thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving combatant,
body, o agni; guard my body', he says , for he is a guardian of the body. 'o agni, whatever is
in the middle of the sky is the dappled stone set down
one is on the hither side, the other on the farther side of the back of the heavens; secretly are deposited the
on to the fleece they urge with stones the dear, the goldencoloured one,
winners of cattle shali ye be if ye regain for me this man.
king pavamana is implored with holy songs, on man's behalf,
how did the earth and the sky come into being? in what order were the various components of the
defeated. having driven away these two, the gods offered to themselves,' to indra. 'driven away are
world of the gods; fresh butter is as it were midway; therefore he anoints with fresh butter, along the
dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice flow unto him like milch-kine, lowing, with their milk.
2 thou, hero, art a warrior, thou art giver of abundant spoil.
hereby could one be born though waxen mighty. let him not, otherwise, destroy his mother.
strong, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, pressed from the stone, soma hath waxen mighty.
5 prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new bymn, thou giver of all bounties.
prajapati; (verily it serves) for the production of offspring. he causes water to follow along; verily thus
the amulet which brihaspati tied, the ploughshare dripping with ghee, the strong khadira, unto strength, that
with these chase all our foes to every quarter: subdue the tribes of dasas to the arya.
the two sages alert and watchful, the sleepless and the vigilant, these two guardians of thy life's breath, are
o o ye waters, goddesses, purifying and pure, do ye bring the gods; may we, pure and served (by you),
and, indra, soma drinker, come to listen to our songs of praise!
11 and now, o indra, strengthen us: come near and aid us in the fight,
.67 mantra 67 – soma and others (authors: saptarsis, pavitra angiras)
5 mayst thou, o indra, on the day of trial, present or absent, wheresoe'er thou dwellest,
offerings, increasing holy order; on the path of the moving ocean i offer all the days to viçvakarman the
thread, that which they have put into raw flesh, with these slay thou those that have prepared the spell!
rubbed into life, well stablished in the dwelling, leader of sacrifice, the sage, the youthful,
verily he wins food together with its place of birth. he should pile one that has to be collected together,
then indra said, about to slaughter vrtra, o my friend vrtra, stride full boldly forward.
as soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his. great errand, suddenly grew strong.
a to the heart thee! to mind thee! to the sky thee! to the sun thee!
when about to be born; verily also with the smaller he approaches the greater. he takes the four teats
adorns the quarters; verily from the quarters he wins strength and sap. the speckled butter is the
the awful car, brhaspati, that quells the foe, slays demons, cleaves the stall of kine, and finds the light.
11 they have drained him the steer of heaven, him with a thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,
8 urge ye the conqueror to give, your indra greatly to be praised,
man eats of savoury fruit and then takes, even as he wills, his rest.
he unites him. 'in him establish the kingdom', he says; verily in him he makes the kingdom to abide. if
5 whose lories when he glows in front of sacrite are fair to see,
(saying) 'on the impulse of the god savitr thee', he takes the sword, for impelling. 'with the arms of the
whatever health and strength our father manu won by sacrifice may we, under thy guidance, gain.
9 this is the great ones' mighty apparition which from of old the radiant cow hath followed.
2 i know not either warp or woof, i know not the web they weave when moving to the contest.
both circumjacent parents come together to yield us length of days they hasten forward.
6 now for us both, mete out, o wonderworkers, riches exceeding great with store of heroes,
fail not when marching onward: come hither, like-spirited, stay not far away
not sacrifice; therefore the sacrificer is higher than the man who does not sacrifice. he fills up the
thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the gods thou gavest room and freedom.
15, upon thee have ascended the brihatî and the pankti (metres), upon thee the kakubh with splendour, o
let us draw indra with true deeds anear us: he loves our songs, the hero, and is potent.
5 this is to-day the goodliest gift of savitar: this thought we have when now the god is furthering us.
do thou, poured forth by pressing- stones, flow hither uttering a roar,
3 when fair bright days shall dawn on us, o indra, and thou shalt bring thy banner near in battle,
through time the wind blows, through time (exists) the great earth; the great sky is fixed in time. in time the
3 yea, come at milking-time, at early morning, at noon of day and when the sun is setting,
1 indra and agni i invoke fain are we for their song of praise
6 i bend the bow for rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater of devotion.
sacrifice; verily by them do they proceed to the world of heaven. they mount the world of heaven
verily he offers in that which has fire, the adhvaryu does not become blind, and the raksases. do not
scriptures in their entirety. numerous sites exist that provide portions of scriptures and/or
with thine own power and might thou slewest vrtra: no foe hath found the end of thee in battle.
invite him, (saying), 'thou hast slain my son.' he made a disturbance of the sacrifice, and forcibly drank
12 let us not here contend with gods, o indra, for here, o mighty one, is thine own portion,
our wealthy patrons who bestow rich gifts on us of steeds and kine, high-born! delightful with thy
bespeak for the takman, or these regions here other (than ours).
sacrifice, for that cause a son is born shamefaced and retiring. one offering only should one make; a
our sacrifices with our homage unto him much-lauded, very rich, for help:
puronuvakya, is marked in front; therefore the ox feeds with the first half. the yajya is marked behind;
9 the chief and best of these abideth in the sea, nor doth libation fail wherein it is prolonged.
o god, come by those paths so fair to travel, preserve thou us from harm this day, and bless us.
2 like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, and seek like eager guests your bidder's banquet.
4 they with their might have stayed heaven, earth, and prthivi, the lord of light, the firmament, -the
the pure and lovely face of holy order hath shone like gold of heaven in its arising.
so first to thee have pious men resorted, turning thy mind to thoughts of ample riches.
to gather with the skin of tame animals he would afflict with pain tame animals; he gathers with a black
i touch the head of thee, the immortal, o hotr, for increase of wealth, good offspring, strength.
bring the gods hither, thou of many aspects: turn hitherward aramati the holy.
3 sages shall glorify agni with earnest thoughts, ensign of sacrifice, who fills the synod full:
burn, o agni, after having been kindled by the firewood, bring skilfully hither the gods that are to be revered!
may these my songs of eulogy exalt thee! do ye preserve us evermore with blessings!
not his abode. the sacrificial cake is the sacrificer, the oblations are cattle; in that he offers these
about thee (my husband) i have placed the overpowering (plant), upon thee placed the very overpowering one.
by means of thee i shall conquer the enemy, as indra (conquered) the sâlâvrikas. overcome the debate of
3 in whose wild joy thou settest free the kine held fast within the rock,
for ita's sake who pressed the juice, thou, indra, didst protect his car,
what this black bird has brushed here with thy mouth, o nirtiti (goddess of misfortune)-may agni gârhapatya
.25 sukta 25 – charm to arouse the passionate love of a woman
4 they shrink not from the birth; in this same manner still resting there they purge away reproaches.
when to the praise-singers he gives the boon of substance rich in kine.
being performed, to prevent the infestation of the raksases, for they do not move them, but they lie
may ear accord with the sacrifice, may mind accord with the sacrifice, may the body accord with the
thou art, (o plant), a maiden, taudî by name.; ghritâkî, forsooth, is thy name. underfoot is thy place: i take in
of) these twenty nights. then indeed they acquired both the holy power (brahman) and food, and
2 what god hath seen me? who of all their number clearly beheld my forms in many places?
having given a glimpse of his omniscience in the previous verse, shree krishna now goes back to a subject he had covered earlier about the dualities in the world. happiness and distress, pleasure and pain, summer and winter, night and day, etc., all these dualities exist in pairs. these dualities are an inseparable part of life’s experiences. however, the most deluding dualities in life are birth and death. the arena of one’s life exists between the two ends of birth and death. from the very moment a living creature is born, death is inevitable, and again comes a subsequent-birth.our material intellect believes that worldly pleasures will give us happiness and fulfillment. therefore, in material consciousness, while we desire the favorable ones, we detest the unpleasant experiences. although attraction and aversion are not the inherent qualities of these dualities, they develop due to our ignorance. our intellect does not realize that materially pleasurable situations will only increase our material illusion. thus, it makes us believe that pain is detrimental to us. however, adversities have the potential of dispelling that material illusion from our mind and elevate our soul. our ignorance is the root cause of our delusions. a spiritually elevated person accepts these dualities as inseparable aspects of god’s creation and rises above likes and dislikes, attraction and aversion, etc.
1 what shall we sing to rudra, strong, most bounteous, excellently wise,
8 for indra, soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press the soma juice.
have been brought hither. the diseases of cattle and men have been driven out by the herbs: let them pass into
4 o vrtra-slayer, be thou pleased with these libations, with these hymns,
f terrify me not, o king, pierce not my heart with thy radiance, for manly strength, for life, for
brings them forward with mind; mind is this (earth) ; verily with this (earth) he brings them forward.
hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, soma, the best of sacred gifts,
he, fain to fight the bull whose horns were sharpened, stood fettered in the demon's ample region.
where your gold and silver swings are, where cymbals and lutes chime together, thither do ye, o apsaras,
enkindled, pavamana, lord, sends forth his light on, every side
bring hitherward the car with seats where eight may sit, whereon the gods have brought the treasure
look with him; he becomes rich in cattle. he puts (the head) of the horse in the east looking west, that of
heroes! we cry trembling in fear before you, even in the greatness of your power have mercy.
3 where battle's spoil is piled the singer winneth praise, for indra taketh care of matchless worshippers.
help us, o maghavan, let thy favour aid us thus drive away foes and enemies!
cause strife with the gods. 'better than good have the gods brought together', he says, for the eating of
31 come, lord of rapturous, joys, to our libation with thy bay steeds, come
7 for glory, agni, day by day, thou liftest up the mortal man to highest immortality,
3 boldly, bold hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the kanvas' sake.
o agni, god, we kindle thee, refulgent, wasting not away,
(instrument), for the ass is worse than the horse ; they lead the horse in front to avoid confusion;
i to earth hail! to atmosphere hail! to sky hail! to the sun hail! to the moon hail! to the naksatras
gapes should say, 'skill and intelligence (remain) in me'; verily he places expiration and inspiration in
as he imparts all vigour to these people, straightway the folk bend them to him the godlike.
(he should give) as a mess in boiled (milk) to visnu çipivista. agni thus generates offspring for him;
21 deft-handcd! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea.
lord of the tawny, indu, thou who art the gods' most special food,
soma comes onward like a youth with youthful maids, and gains the beaker by a course of hundred paths.
the sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the bird adorned with all an asura's magic might.
he piles the fire in the second year, he saves the atmosphere by it; in that he sacrifices in the third year,
we seek to win thy friendly love, even pavamana's flowing o'er
from radiant dhitar, savitar, and visnu, from surya did these sages bring the gharma.
21 his leadings are with power and might and his instructions manifold:
4 favour us agni with his face of splendour, and varuva and mitra and the asvins.
4 to him who worshippeth hath indra given many and matchless gifts. he slayeth vrtra.
2 all songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way,
i ye have made me, who am not younger, the younger;
when through the filter thou art poured we clothe thee with a robe of milk,
sajaniya hymn; one should recite the vihavya hymn; one should recite the kayaçubhiya hymn of
7 on the world's summit i bring forth the father: my home is in the waters, in the ocean.
g this gift of thine, agni, cometh, impelled by the soma.
7 who shall approach the pious? who the man whose sacred grass is trimmed?
grant to the worshipper who presses soma and gives guerdon, not unto the churl.
6 they slay our arya foes, these lords of heroes, slay our dasyu foes
theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven and this mighty earth which bear rich treasure in
the fleece retains his solid parts as though impure, and bright and cleansed he seeks the special place
slay not our heroes in the fury of thy wrath. bringing oblations evermore we call to thee.
the singing-men of ancient time open the doors of sacred songs-the men who bring the mighty one.
so, agni, loose from us the bonds that bind us, when thou art seated here, o priest who knowest.
upon which, after he has reached the fullest age, he shall ascend to the highest firmament, the supreme heavens!
king, chase their hatred far away, thou bounteous one, dispel our foes.
m o agni, utter 'hail!' o all-knower, over the oblation for indra;
he saw this second layer, he put it down, it became the atmosphere. the sacrifice said to prajapati,
3 that he may bear their gifts to heaven, all glorify him agni, god,
ye twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, clothed be your clouds in robes of oil and
22 when did the son of' tugra serve you, men? abandoned in the sea,
may he enrich us for our prayers and praises: now can the cow be milked; the path is open.
3 when the bull, quaffing, praises our iibation, as a sage paying holy rites in secret,
the village', they say; in that he refrains from those of the village, thereby be wins them; in that he eats
g thou art the path of the atmosphere; thou art the gods' path of the atmosphere.
all round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as 'twere a never-failing well for men to drink,
of one accord, with indra, o ye rudras, come borne on your golden car for our prosperity.
7 these drops have cried with resonant voice: like swift steeds they have run the course,
4 borne on your golden car, ye omnipresent! come to this sacrifice of ours, nasatyas.
17 upward, o agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplendent, blazing high,
i araru is smitten away from the earth, the place of sacrifice.
9 thou hast established in her seat, o indra, the level earth, vast, vigorous, unbounded.
with song the wise and skilful consecrate him: his voice the god-adoring singer utters.
beaker. if he were to call without holding the vayu cup or the beaker, he would lose his own; therefore
jagati metre. in that there is an oblation to brhaspati, and brhaspati is the holy power of the gods, verily
that in the great encounter with the foemen, loved of all life, indra may guard and help us.
11 they drave the cloud transverse directed hitherward, and poured the fountain forth for thirsting
happily be the traces bound; happily may he ply the goad.
8 the sister quitteth, for the elder sister, her place, and having looked on her departeth.
cattle; he should pay reverence with (face) somewhat to the side, then (the fire) does not burn him, he is
bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage. in indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.
, he should put down for him the heads of animals more closely together; his food becomes less; if he
heaven. he puts it forward (with its points) to the east; verily he makes the sacrificer go to the world of
may we have power to hold thy steeds of riches, laying on thee the god-sent gift of glory.
6 indra, as such, give us a share of sunlight, of waters, sinlessness, and reputation.
this (earth); in that he piles with clay, therefore is it called the fire.
the poison of the sarkota (scorpion) that creeps low upon the ground, (after he) has been deprived of his
i praise the god of wondrous might like indra, the lovely pleasant guest whom all must welcome.
e o sun, blazing, be thou blazing among the gods; make me blazing, of long life, radiant among men; for
11 & 12 & 14 lord, we seek your blessings. may you as ashvins bless us;
choose a boon; through me shall ye obtain all your desires, but the oblation shall come to me before (it
20 the desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in length they spread!
7 hear thou syavasva while he sings to thee, as erst thou heardest atri when he wrought his holy rites.
11 thy spirit, that went far away to distant realms beyond our ken,
in this verse, god declares that he is trikāl-darśhī—knower of the past, present, and the future. most of us are forgetful of even what we were thinking a few hours ago; whereas, god is omniscient. he remembers and keeps a record of the deeds, words, and even the thoughts of each individual soul of the universe throughout their life and since their infinite lifetimes. god maintains this record of the sañchitkarma or the stockpile of karmas of every soul for endless lifetimes because, as the governor of the law of karma, he dispenses justice to the souls.shree krishna says that he has the knowledge of everything, the past, present, and the future. however, with our finite intellect, we cannot know the almighty god. his infinite glory, splendor, energies, qualities, and extent are beyond the comprehension of our inadequate intellect.the vedic scriptures state:yaḥ sarvajñaḥ sarvavidyasya jñānamayaṁ tapaḥ (muṇḍakopaniṣhad 1.1.9) [v25]“god is all-knowing and omniscient. his austerity consists of knowledge.”naiṣhā tarkeṇa matirāpaneyā (kaṭhopaniṣhad 1.2.9) [v26]“god is beyond the scope of our intellectual logic.”yato vācho nivartante aprāpya manasā saha (taittirīya upaniṣhad 2.9.1) [v27]“god cannot be described in words, nor can our mind comprehend him.”rām atarkya buddhi mana bānī, mata hamāra asa sunahi sayānī (ramayan) [v28]“god cannot be analyzed by arguments or formulated by words, mind, and intellect.”only god knows himself. however, if he finds some eligible soul, he bestows his grace upon that fortunate soul, and then with god’s divine intellect, the soul gets to know god. therefore, only by god’s grace one can know god. our material intellect does not have the capacity to know him otherwise. the concept of god’s grace is discussed again in detail in 10.11 and 18.56.
running over troop by troop he offers; verily he makes the people obedient to him.
25 chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, soma flowcth on,
8 him in whose hands they say are stored all treasures from the days of old,
the trees, and (growths) that are like trees, the plants and the herbs as well, the gandharvas and the
back of his peers; he becomes possessed of a village. it is with a white back, for it has brhaspati as its
15 four youthful sons of masarsara vex me, three, of the king, the conquering ayavasa.
drive him away, hold him afar from us: the âdityas and angiras shall stay near it!
roll onward to the press-boards as they cleanse thee, far-seeing at the feast of gods and watchful!
give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then shall glorious men in troops adore thee.
b thou art he who is appropriated; make our food full of sweetness for us; to all the powers of sky and
this one (kaurama) presented the seer with a hundred jewels, ten chaplets, three hundred steeds, and ten
himself the glory of the sacrifice. if he desire, 'may i bestow upon the sacrificer the glory of the
he who comes wielding in his might the thunder, maghavan, gives prayer, praise, and laud, and soma.
bring opulence and drive away affliction. may brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
yea, let young children sing their lauds as a strong castle praise ye him.
loving the gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing to our quadrupeds and bipeds.
2 rejoicing in his friendship, let the priest be seated over man,
he slays in unabated vigour with great might, whomever brahmanaspati takes for his friend.
8 lead us to meadows rich in grass: send on our way no early heat:
down from the heavens the falcon brought thee hitherward, even thee, o indu, thee whom all our
9 he on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend nath roared and thundered like the summit
i will extol the most heroic indra who with his might forced earth and sky asunder;
5 when through his power and in his strong prevailing flames the maruts' gladdening boons mingle with
he who sacrifices knowing the 'ascent' verses of the pavamana (stotras) mounts on the pavamanas and
4 the car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the sages, child!
desires support; the ekavinça is the support of the stomas; (verily it serves) for support. it has eight
'him'; verily he makes the saman. he makes the noise 'him'; where the gods rested, there he sets them
the theologians say, 'since they do not offer to any deity, then what deity has the stream of wealth?'
7 bring to us, agni, angiras, lauded of old and lauded now,
wealth suited to our needs, o stirrer of the thought, best wealth, o thou who stirrest thought.
11 so may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on the viands of the brahman.
3 here these our holy hymns with joy and gladness in pious emulation have approached thee.
2 not this way go i forth: hard is the passage. forth from the side obliquely will i issue.
vaiçvanara; verily they put light before them, to reveal the world of heaven. there is a fore offering,
to the offspring of waters a fish; the crocodile, the dolphin, the kulikaya are for the ocean; to speech the
the deities conduct the pious man to them: like suitors they delight in him who loveth prayer.
do thou shine with wealth for us, o thou of many faces.
2 like as the watery ocean, so doth he receive the rivers spread on all sides in their ample width.
3 thou, pusan, in whose friendship they who sing forth praise enjoy advantage, even in wisdom,
vairapa saman, the deity the maruts, the treasure the peasant class.
o vrtra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink of the soma juice, thou blameless thunderer.
verily he confers on him expiration and inspiration. 'the rain from the sky, the winds saved, the twentyonefold stoma', he says; the twenty-onefold is support, (verily it serves) for support. 'thou art the
15 nay, do not die, pururavas, nor vanish: let not the evil-omened wolves devour thee.
give us good paths for travel: guard us ivell at home.
3 she, harnessing her car with purple oxen. injuring none, hath brought perpetual riches.
ye have invested men, ye mighty beings, with manly strength that conquers in the battle.
the anvaharya mess, he delights the messengers of the gods. prajapati distributed the sacrifice to the
11 beside a thousand spotted kine i have received a gift of gold,
what, o earth, i dig out of thee, quickly shall that grow again: may i not, o pure one, pierce thy vital spot,
way', 'coming to earth, o steed', he says; verily he wishes for it with the first and obtains it with the
hither hath run the gold-hued child of surya, and reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.
4 others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath coveted, that rapid courser:
in front the sacrificer smites away his enemies; therefore offspring are engendered behind, and are
5 o agni, at the third libation takewith joy the offered cake of sacrifice, thou, son of strength.
c thou art overcoming; may i be overcoming among my equals, overcoming, a guardian, a granter of
he repels his foes. he should pile in triangle form on both sides, who desires, 'may i repel the foes i
reverence we offer, o bhava, to thy roaring, to thy breath, and to thy injurious qualities; reverence to thee, o
the one subdueth the destructive enemy; the other with a few furthereth many a man.
4 agni, the lofty flames of' thee enkindled have gone up on high,
possessed of sight. in that there are two for agni, he restores his eyes for him; in that there is (an
therefore the worse follows after the better. many are the foes of the man who waxes great, he waxes
that, separate from his mother, two support him, closely-united, twins, here made apparent.
on her all-lovely car she comes, the fair one, and brings rich treasure for her faithful servant.
prajapati; rudra; varuna; agni; lord of the quarters; may he protect our cattle, may he protect us, to him
to them, great parents of the gods, have sages of ancient time, singing, assigned precedence.
makes a portion of the intestines, for breath is in the middle; he makes a portion of the upper part , for
among men. 'thou art to be invoked at our sacrifices', he says; for him they invoke at the sacrifices.
then-at your glad carouse-let men joy in thy love, sweet juice! as kine in pasture. thou. art waxing
a surya, the god, for those that sit in the sky, dhatr for lordly power, vayu for offspring, brhaspati for
the season-cups are drawn for the world of heaven; indra and agni are the light; in that he draws the
11 o savitar, thine ancient dustless pathways are well established in the air's midregion:
anoints with that which contains the word 'of a thousand'; prajapati is of a thousand; (verily it serves) to
to tvastr hail! to tvastr the seminal hail! to tvastr the multiform hail!
20 ye, wonder-workers, filled with milk for sayu the milkless cow, emaciated, barren;
8 her, sinivali, her, gungu, her, raka, her, sarasvati, indrani to mine aid i call, and vartunani for my
one above the other is larger, for so as it were are these worlds; (verily they serve) for prosperity; he cuts
5 whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, his who is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent,
mixed with barley ; barley is strength, the sounding-holes are the vital airs; verily he places strength
.3 sukta 3 – shepherd’s charm against wild beasts and robbers
me!' the creatures (pragâh) watch over him, pragâpati watches over him, that knoweth thus.
c may i not brush the place of the cattle, i brush thee that art strong and overcomest foes.
6 come to the worshipper's abode, asvins, who here is lauding you,
and made him rich with kine and cars and horses. these things did indra in the soma's rapture.
b on the instigation of the god savitr, through brhaspati, winner of the prize, may i mount the highest
is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, amid the ten surrounding arms.
.5 sukta 5 – praise of an amulet derived from the parna tree, designed to strengthen
its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood.
the question may be raised that if soul is distinct from the guṇas and their activities, then why are the ignorant attached to sense objects? shree krishna explains in this verse that they become bewildered by the guṇas of the material energy, and think themselves to be the doers. infatuated by the three modes of material nature, they work for the express purpose of being able to enjoy sensual and mental delights. they are unable to perform actions as a matter of duty, without desiring rewards.however, the kṛitsna-vit (persons with knowledge) should not disturb the minds of the akṛitsna-vit (persons without knowledge). this means that the wise should not force their thoughts onto ignorant persons by saying, “you are the soul, not the body, and hence karm is meaningless; give it up.” rather, they should instruct the ignorant to perform their respective karm, and slowly help them rise above attachment. in this way, after presenting the distinctions between those who are spiritually wise and those who are ignorant, shree krishna gives the sober caution not to unsettle the minds of the ignorant.
one with his powers the universe regardeth: of one, the sweep is seen, but his figure.
for the sake of truth and holy strength do we make over this porridge as a hoarded treasure to the gods: it
in the previous verse, shree krishna explained that through bhakti the devotees enter into full awareness of him. equipped with it, they see everything in its connection with god. they see their body, mind, and intellect as the energies of god; they see their material possessions as the property of god; they see all living beings as parts and parcels of god; and they see themselves as his tiny servants. in that divine consciousness, they do not give up work, rather they renounce the pride of being the doers and enjoyers of work. they see all work as devotional service to the supreme, and they depend upon him for its performance.then, upon leaving their body, they go to the divine abode of god. just as the material realm is made from the material energy, the divine realm is made from the spiritual energy. hence, it is free from the defects of material nature, and is perfect in every way. it is sat-chit-ānand i.e., full of eternality, knowledge, and bliss. regarding his divine realm, shree krishna had said in verse 15.6: “neither the sun nor the moon, nor fire can illumine that supreme abode of mine. having gone there, one does not return to this material world again.”the various forms of god have their own personal abodes in the spiritual realm, where they engage in eternal loving pastimes with their devotees. those who perfect their selfless loving service toward him go to the abode of their worshipped form of god. thus, the devotees of lord krishna go to golok; those of lord vishnu go to vaikunth; the devotees of lord ram go to saket; the worshippers of lord shiv go to shiv lok; those of mother durga go to devi lok, etc. the devotees, who reach these divine abodes, having attained him, participate in his divine pastimes that are imbued with the perfection of the spiritual energy.
4 yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe priest among mankind, oblation-bearer,
16 at this my call, o agni and parjanya, help, swift to hear, my thought and our laudation.
as thou with eager speed, o sage, hast come from far away to hel
9 tvastar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic art, bringing most blessed bowls that hold the drink
wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, and nine-and-ninety flowing streams of water.
he who with sacrifices worships indra is lord of wealth, law-born and law's protector.
again, again i call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly strength to him who craves it.
when on the sieve the golden-hued is cleansed, he rests within the vats as one who seats him in his
yea, she most dear amid dear streams-seven-sistered, loved with foundest love.
9 she who hath knowledge of the first day's nature is born refulgent white from out the darkness.
yea, this is good to taste and full of. sweetness, verily it is strong and rich in flavour.
this great healer of wounds has been gotten out of the earth: that is the cure for discharges, and
drink. the deities who share in the pressings of those who leave out the day go to their places; they offer
horse) unyoked. he offers after putting it on his head, for from the head it sprung; he offers after
'hail!'; verily he finds support in the world of heaven. so many are the worlds of the gods; verily in them
prepare oblation so that thou mayst have success. we crave the favouring help of brahmanaspati.
5 he filled the earthly atmosphere and pressed against the lights in heaven.
he springs to life each month, each day that passes; so gods have made him their oblation-bearer.
.5.7 mantra 7: the rule as to the number of stakes
5 when thou wast born supremest at a distance, bearing a name renowned in far-off regions,
goes to ruin; offspring are soothed where these are put down. the waters are the hearts of the waters; in
.7 sukta 7 – apotheosis of the ukkhishta, the leavings of the sacrifice
p the earth ours, the oblation the gods, the benedictions the sacrificers'; for the divinities of the gods i
the last two; thus they do not burn him up, and for whatever desire they are offered that he obtains by
3 imperial kings, strong, heroes, lords of earth and heaven, mitra and varuna, ye ever active ones,
for help have i invoked you rich in power and might: for, house by house, ye visit all.
far from the sun keep those who hate devotion, the godless, prospering in their vocation.
21 wherewith ye served krsanu where the shafts were shot, and helped the young man's horse to
3 the poison that is formed upon the salmali, that which is found in streams, that which the plants
o âditya, in thy law, exempt from guilt, live in freedom!
indra, may the quarters and indra, may the head and indra, may prajapati and indra (be auspicious for
like a strong bull who whets his horns kpen-pointed, like a brave warrior in the fray for cattle.
5 in the floods' home art thou enkindled, agni, o jatavedas, son of strength, eternal,
to him who praises you while these libations flow: that man, o gods, ye ne'er consume.
2 even to the dull and uninspired indra, gives vital power, and wins
2 agni the god the first among the immortals, - of his auspicious name let us bethink us.
a thou art a vasvi, thou art a rudra, thou art aditi, thou art an aditya, thou art çukra, thou art candra.
21 he, being purified, hath made the mornings shine: this, even this is he who gave the rivers room.
vastospati; verily with his own share he appeases him; the sacrificer does not come to ruin. if he were to
three are the pillars set upon it for support: thrice journey ye by night, o asvins, thrice by day.
as splendour is in pragâpati, as in this parameshthin (the lord on high), thus shall the amulet of varana hold
2 kings, guards of rrtighty everlasting order, come hitherward, ye princes, lords of rivers.
the senses create sensations of pleasure in contact with the sense objects. the mind, which is like the sixth sense, derives pleasure from honor, praise, circumstances, success, etc. all these pleasures of body and mind are known as bhog (material enjoyment). such worldly pleasures cannot satisfy the soul for the following reasons:worldly pleasures are finite, and hence the feeling of deficiency remains inherent in them. one may feel happiness on becoming a millionaire, but the same millionaire becomes discontented on seeing a billionaire, and thinks, “if only i also had one billion, then i too would be happy.” in contrast, the bliss of god is infinite, and so it gives complete satisfaction.worldly pleasures are temporary. once they finish, they again leave one with the feeling of misery. for example, an alcoholic enjoys the pleasure of drinking alcohol at night, but the next morning, the hangover gives him a splitting headache. however, the bliss of god is eternal, and once attained, it remains forever.worldly pleasures are insentient, and hence they continuously decrease. when people see a new academy award prize-winning movie, they are overjoyed, but if they have to see the movie a second time to give company to a friend, their joy dries up. and if a second friend insists that they see it a third time, they say, “give me any punishment, but don’t ask me to see that movie again.” the pleasure from material objects keeps decreasing as we enjoy it. in economics, this is defined as the law of diminishing returns. but the bliss of god is sentient; it is sat-chit-ānand (eternal ever-fresh divine bliss). hence, one can go on chanting the same divine name of god all day long, and relish ever-new devotional satisfaction in it.no sane person enjoying a delicious dessert would be willing to give it up and eat mud instead. similarly, when one begins to enjoy divine bliss, the mind loses all taste for material pleasures. those endowed with the faculty of discrimination understand the above three drawbacks of material pleasures, and restrain their senses from them. shree krishna emphasizes this in the next verse.
11 fair as a bride embellished by her mother thou showest forth thy form that all may see it.
3 for he is mental power, a man, and perfect; he is the bringer, friend-,like, of the wondrous.
7 our hopes rest on the faithful one: in indra is the people's life.
generation. the sacrificial fee is a pair of kine, for prosperity.
2 now all this world, for worship, shall come after thee-the offerer's libations like floods to the depth,
2 robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty sage pronouncing invocations.
7 one who does not know the way should enquire of one who knows. directed by the instructor he
bring us, lord of bay steeds, to make us joyful, celestial wealth, abundant, undecaying.
c ye are missiles by name; your houses are in the east; your arrows are agni; the water, &c.
thou, o agni, to the man eager to worship, o ancient king .
10 they who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of steeds, moved by desire of great renowndo thou with saving help preserve them from distress, most youthful! with a hundred forts.
13 with indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening things wherewith,
so might he bring-lord also of the darkness-the light in heaven that i may see its beauty!
19 o agni, lord and master of men's homesteads, with kindled fuel we have made thee mighty.
favour this (plan), anumati; fit it tooether, âkûti! ye gods, send forth the yearning love may yonder man burn
not fall, the cups are breaths; verily he frees the breaths of the people from pain, and rain soon falls.
the raksases. 'thou, o soma, brought about by ourselves', he says, for he is the one who brings about
d to us from the sky, from the great mountain;
maruts; the bright, the ruddy woolled, the white, are for sarasvati; the piebald, the grey piebald, the
9 when, o nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither with our hymns,
indu sends forth a voice on high, up in the region of the sea.
his bolt and team hath he prepared, and stablished the heaven for quadrupeds and men two-footed.
favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
3 the glowing ladle, filled with oil, is lifted; choosing gods' service to the right he circles.
therefore reverence should be paid to the fire. prajapati created cattle; being created they entered day
for atonement. he cuts from the sides, for men cut from the middle; be cuts crossways, for men cut
in full accord with savitar, divine one; in full accord with floods that pour forth riches.
lord of the lovely look, all things belong to thee: ten, hundred, yea, a thousand are outweighed by thee.
7 may vatsa draw- thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwelling-place,
as the rising sun takes away the lustre of the stars, thus do i take away the strength of both the women and the
enemies through rage; supporter of the body through kindliness; wealth through food; through the earth
the hymn of praise extols indra the far-renowned: him girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
puroruc, it is as when one brings (something) to a superior; in that he draws the cup, it is as when having
long have they been inflated with presumption: slay them, and bring us hither their possessions.
now drink thou with the wealth-bestowing rbhus, whom for their skill thou madest friends, o indra.
wealth, gods! which breaks the curse of those who vex us, be, indra-varuna, e'en our own
2 thou sentest forth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou dravest forth the kine, thou drankest
thou wishest for thy kine a bull, lord of thy cows whom none may kill,
8 let there be light through both the worlds for worship: may we be far from most overwhelming evil.
10 o king, whoever, be he friend or kinsman, hath threatened me affrighted in my slumberif any wolf or robber fain would harm us, therefrom, o varuna, give thou us protection.
3 the fire is kindled, soma pressed, o indra: let thy bays, best to draw, convey thee hither.
behold the gods' high wisdom in its greatness: he who died yesterday to-day is living.
4 these pavamanas have obtained all blessings much to be desired,
17 vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the cow who ne'er hath calved, sabardhu,
2 to asamati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, a radiant car,
offspring, and cattle of the sacrificer; he should pronounce over it the formula, 'thou hast fallen to me
10 whether, o indra-agni, ye be dwelling in highest earth, in central, or in lowest,
6 even as the holy wish, the gift is offered: may he, unsated, come when men desire him.
i thou art the bolt of indra slaying foes; with thee may he slay his foe.
be friendly to its in thy spirit, manyu, o much-invoked, in shock of mighty battle.
washed by the men, the strong farseeing one streams forth nutriti us food that all desire.
the man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of deities will conquer those who worship not.
a sluggish steed men run not with the courser, nor ever lead an ass before a charger.
dear to agni. now he who steps the strides of visnu is apt as he goes away to be burnt up; he turns with
knowing this, o salve, i shall speak the truth, avoid falsehood. may i obtain horses and cattle, and thy person,
11 he, satakratu, even in fight acts as a vrtra-slayer s,till:
blessing. (of the garment) the place where the border is belongs to agni, the wind-guard to vayu, the
clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light, produceth forms that please us..
to agni, maker of paths, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds who being a sacrificer at full and
2 light rolls your easy chariot faring earthward, what time, for food, ye, full of wisdom, mount it.
4 his chariot decked with pearl, of various colours, lofty, with golden pole, the god hath mounted,
sacrificial gifts, he would appropriate his fire; him who piles his fire he should prosper with sacrificial
since ye have been invoked, o teeth, be ye in unison kind and propitious! elsewhere, o teeth, shall pass away
o king bhava, be merciful to thy worshipper, for thou art the lord of living beasts! he who believes the gods
2 may mitra bear us oer distress, and varuna and aryaman,
offering) is on seven potsherds; the maruts are in seven troops; verily in troops he wins his rivals for
character of the samidhenis is the quarter-verse which is repeated with the word 'ghee' in it. 'thee with
high vital strength, and manifold, may he grant us. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
4 i made to flow the moisture-shedding waters, and set the heaven firm in the scat of order.
the babe unborn supporteth this world's burthen, fuifilleth law and overcometh falsehood.
shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors, they raise their voice and chant their psalm as
4 thou, agni, art spread widely forth, priest dear and excellent; through thee
3 this laud hath won the burden of the mountain. to aid the ancient birth of mighty waters
tristubh metre; for twelve the adityas, they conquered the sky, the jagati metre; then they attained
2 he who filled full his belly with the soma's juice, maghavan, was delighted with the meath's sweet
13 all ye, the gods whom savitar the father of truth, and varuna and mitra govern,
its incisors it is more puissant than those with one row of incisors, by its hair than those with two rows;
hither to thee savitar shall lead the husband that is agreeable! do thou, o herb, bestow (him) upon her!
he gives the hero room who pours oblations, and treasure even to the lowly singer.
agni hath helped our friends, hath helped medhyitithi, hath helped upastuta to win.
strong rudra with the marut host, indra, agni let us call for weal beyond our foes.
and that all in this village be prosperous and free from ill.
10 with all the gods, with indra, with vayu, and mitra's splendours, drink,
2 this most delightful eulogy awaits you in the man's house drink-offering hath been heated,
purify thee'; verily by speech he purifies him. he says, 'let the god savitr purify thee'; verily being
11 i lay upon the floods your hymn, lightwinning, wherewith navagvas their ten months completed.
5 o god! the lord of the universe! the stimulator of good thoughts!
f thou art the caul of kingly power, thou art the womb of kingly power.
and when we have made up the year, let us cease' . in their case their horns grew in the twelfth month.
great sap of all forms (colours) it hath-they call thee moreover the seed of the ocean. where the honey-lash
6 ye who have gathered up your gifts, celestial and terrestrial food,
2, the warrior whom none may wound, the soma-drinker ne'er o'erthrown,
agni with bridegroom's grace and lovely colour may not be touched when all his form is fury.
5 when they in dazzling rush have made the mountains roar, and shaken heaven's high back in their
acknowledge them. among the gods, for thou art the rmost excellent, the worshipper's blissful
still here thy conquering might, maghavan, would be famed: it hath waxed vast as heaven in majesty
thee', he says; verily thereby he bestows body upon him. the priests speak (these words) around; as
never be thief or sinful man your matter, and may the dart of rudra still avoid you.
deft-handed! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea. thou, pavamana, makest riches flow to us,
2 the drop of soma, pressed by wise nahusyas, becomes the banquet of the heavenly peopleindu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal, with the sheep and cows and waters.
6 may heaven and earth make food swell plenteously for us, all-knowing father, jother, wondrous in
grant this the treasure-lord of treasures, coming, observant, oftenest of gods, with succour!
(that which is called) prakrî, the (songs called) ukthya, are woven and deposited in the ukkhishta; (also the parts)
o indra, hear us. raining down the soma, we call on thee to win us mighty valour.
to the praises of the rsis and the sacrifice of men.
if ye are enveloped in darkness, covered as if by a net--we tear all spells out from here, send them back again
vamadevya. 'the great and powerful one, o agni', he says. this is the character of the brhat. in that he
20 with worship, him whom men adore, with soma, him who drinks it most,
for thou art lord of gathered wealth and treasure. of the bright song of praise thou art inventor.
full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go: a thousand bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls.
sacrifice by which (special) wishes are fulfilled, together with the metres, the sacrifices that have passed out, and
from lameness, not deformed in limb, there may we behold our parents and our children!
4 so like a bull thou rushest to the lord who loves the trough, the sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat,
gods the little blood they drew the raksases smothered by the nights and dawn dawned on them
6 inquiring after him, thy later servants, indra, have gained thy former old traditions.
if i have lied or falsely sworn, waters, remove it far from me.
syllables won the tristubh; the all-gods with twelve syllables won the jagati; the vasus with thirteen
and the sacrificer would be without cattle. 'thee offered to the lord of speech i eat', he says; verily
6 when sitting pondering in deep devotion in ausija's abode they ply the press-stone,
7 now and of old the home of wealth, the mansion of what is born and what was born aforetime,
power on the sacrificer . in front of that for indra he offers that for the all-gods; food is connected
be, for our weal, our friend and sharer of the feast, and let thy wisdom guard us well.
8 they at whose racings forth the earth, like an age-weakened lord of men,
discriminations, to sever speech and preserve the sacrificer . he makes a discrimination; verily he
2 borne on by rapid steeds of mighty pinion, or proudly trusting in the gods' incitements.
sap to soma; verily he ransoms from agni his body, from soma his sap, and even if his life is gone, yet
like lightnings flashing round us, like a rattling car that seeks the spoil.
they gather together the sacrifice when (they gather the dust of) the foot-print of the soma cow; the
ceaseless they movelnopposite directions: men mark the one, and fail to mark the other.
the eastern, the pitrs the southern, men the western, the rudras the northern. in that he makes a hall with
that conquering car, o indra, that sets forth at dawn, that never breaks, may we ascend for happiness.
between the ahavaniya and the oblation-holder he should pour (it) down ; verily he bestows upon
.29 sukta 29 – charm for obtaining long life and prosperity by transmission of disease
o child of strength, to thee whose look is lovely, with oblations we,
the atiratra; the sodaçin is the thunderbolt; verily having won cattle for him by the thunderbolt, he
thou call hither the warriors; with thy friends beat vigorously down the enemies!
here, lord krishna states that he reciprocates with everyone as they surrender to him. for those who deny the existence of god, he meets them in the form of the law of karma—he sits inside their hearts, notes their actions, and dispenses the results. but such atheists too cannot get away from serving him; they are obliged to serve god’s material energy, maya, in its various apparitions, as wealth, luxuries, relatives, prestige, etc. maya holds them under the sway of anger, lust, and greed. on the other hand, for those who turn their mind away from worldly attractions and look upon god as the goal and refuge, he takes care of them just as a mother takes care of her child.shree krishna uses the word bhajāmi, which means “to serve.” he serves the surrendered souls, by destroying their accumulated karmas of endless lifetimes, cutting the bonds of maya, removing the darkness of material existence, and bestowing divine bliss, divine knowledge, and divine love. and when the devotee learns to love god selflessly, he willingly enslaves himself to their love. shree ram thus tells hanuman:ekaikasyopakārasya prāṇān dāsyāmi te kapeśheṣhasyehopakārāṇāṁ bhavām ṛiṇino vayaṁ(vālmīki ramayan)[v14]“o hanuman, to release myself from the debt of one service you performed for me, i shall have to offer my life to you. for all the other devotional services done by you, i shall remain eternally indebted.” in this way, god reciprocates with everyone as they surrender to him.if god is so merciful upon his devotees, why do some people worship the celestial gods instead? he explains in the following verse.
14 resistless from of old through hero courage, thou hast done all these many acts, o indra.
neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come like a youth, o god, a house-possessor.
'thou art the body of soma; guard my body.' he approaches his own deity; verily also he invokes this
and who are elders and worthy of respect. may wealth not make me arrogant; may you grant me
right. thou art following; for sky thee! quicken the sky. thou art union; for atmosphere thee! quicken
these who wear hair-knots on the right, the movers of holy thought, white-robed, have won me
3 by you, o lords of ample wealth our songs of praise have been observed:
.7.4 mantra 4: the offerings to the gods and the brahmans
agni, may i become radiant; with the splendour that is thine, o agni, may i become resplendent.
a o agni, drive away those foes of ours that are born;
potsherds to agni and soma; the brahman is connected with agni, he drinks soma; verily he has
26 when eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern of the bull,
lift from us, o varuna, the uppermost fetter, take down the nethermost, loosen the middlemost! then shall we,
4 the bull in joy had drunk a lake of water. his shattering horn encountered an opponent.
art the sitter on the eagle; thou art the sitter on the vault.
agnidh's altar; the agnidh's altar is the invincible part of the sacrifice; verily he places (them) on the
pañcadaça (stoma) is one eminence; the ekavinça one eminence, the trayastrinça one eminence. he,
various customs, but only as regards water are they of one purpose ; if he desire of a man, 'may he be
a spiritual experience gives a happiness that is far more thrilling and satisfying than all the material joys put together. sanjay is rejoicing in such happiness and sharing his experience with the blind dhritarashtra. reflecting and remembering wonderful dialogue, he is feeling divine bliss. this indicates the sublimity of the knowledge contained in this scripture and the divinity of the leela (pastimes) that sanjay was a witness to.
3 promptly we woke to welcome thee, o usas, daughter of the sky,
giving us victory over all our rivals. may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
18 their kin, the prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman, turning his thought to thee thus speaks in
a lioness, bestowing increase of wealth; hail! thou art a lioness, winning (the favour of) the adityas
dweller in floods, king, foremost, he displays his might, set among living things as measure of days.
11 come to us either from anear, or, sakra, come from far away.
gambling, and ignorance have led me into the wrong path. even in dreams am i not free of sin.
clans in the birth-place of the gods, in the three luminous realms of heaven.
6 and may the maruts, praised by all their titles, heroes, enjoy the taste of our oblations.
the ukthya that of the full moon sacrifice, the atiratra that of the new moon sacrifice. he who knowing
world of heaven; he puts it down to the east facing west; therefore to the east facing west the animals
6 this goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he who drives a car the way to travel.
9 rbhus, who helped their parents and the asvins, who formed the milch-cow and the pair of horses,
this soma hath been pressed for thee, o indra: come hither, lord of bays, for this thou lovest.
verily they two place power and strength in him; with power and strength he approaches the battle and
s. o indra, lover of the song, we are the singers of thy praise
all acts of mine shall they accept with pleasure, laudation from the singer who presents it.
2 the chalice that is single make ye into four: thus have the gods commanded; therefore am i come.
2 indra, whatever aids be thine, four be they, or, o hero, three,
5 may this my song reach varuna and indra, and, strongly urging, win me sons and offspring.
k thou art the firm (quarter) and the earth of the god savitr, the maruts, varuna.
give us, o mitra-varuna, a dwelling safe from attack, which ye shall guard, boon-givers!
and in the day our prayer is this: may aditi come nigh to help,
best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly yearn for you.
what it hath drunk, what it hath eaten as fodder ,
be puts down) on the south; the sky is food, the seventeenfold is food; verily on the south he places
striving to win, we celebrate his many deeds of hero might.
9 none of us, maruts, near or at a distance, hath ever reached the limit of your vigour.
the glorious food of varuna and mitra. to him who spreadeth far this laud i offer.
5 for, indra, i have heard thee called self. capturer, one, steer! who never yields, who urges even the
brought forth together with wisdom and potent strength thou grewest great: with hero deeds
rejoice you with the maruts and with indra, with the kings, gods! that ye may give us riches.
bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. may we find strengthening food in full abundance!
for thee all cows are milked to yield the soma-milk, to yield the butter and the milk.
i. the sage of heaven whose heart is wise, when laid between both hands and pressed,
the offspring of them that fashion the spell, practise magic, or plot against us, crush thou, o spell, leave none
these (bricks). by the fire the gods went to the world of heaven; they became yonder krttikas; he for
make thou the hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel filled brimful with treasure.
8 in his own house he dwells in peace and comfort: to him for ever holy food flows richly.
thou in the adityas' keeping movest restlessly. we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
with those to his libation poured, ye heroes, indra, agni, come:
they call for me, their lauds are longing for me. these my bay steeds bear me to these oblations.
26 ye carry on your bodies, ye who see it all: so bless us graciously therewith.
22 pray thou to agni, pray to him who blazes served with sacred oil:
11 put forth thy strength: with dappled steeds come, thou of mighty intellect,
3 with deadly blows i smote atka for kavi's sake; i guarded kutsa well with these saving helps.
upon their shoulders rests as 'twere a warrior's spear and in their hand they hold a dagger and a ring.
may the saptarshi (the 7 stars of the great bear constellation) breathe fearlessness into us.
4 e'en humble rites with his bay steeds he visits: he wields the bolt, drinks soma, gives us cattle.
him who is fain to overpower the man who long sacrificeth.
they seize the flying steer at the stream's breathing place cleansing with gold they grasp the animal
33 on flows the king of rivers and the lord of heaven: he follows with a shout the paths of holy law.
19 whoso would kill us, whether he be a strange foe or one of us,
to our oblation bring the two nasatyas, mitra and varuna and earth and heaven.
agni, the youngest; verily he has recourse to agni, the youngest, with his own share; verily thereby he
of durva grass he puts down, to support animals; with two (verses), for support. 'arising from every
bound with a triple bond the steer roars loudly: the mighty god hath entered in to mortals.
son, bring him here (a gamaya), thou that comest here (agame)!
4 thy glory, agni, i adore, kindled, exalted in thy strength.
angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice's holy statute.
4 bring the gods, agni; in the three appointed places set them down:
7 may they give bliss to aid us well, varuna, mitra, aryaman:
thou art alike in many a place: through all the regions thou art lord.
i thou art the ocean, full of mist, granting moisture, blow over me with healing, with wonder-working;
a thousand and a hundred steeds are harnessed to thy golden car:
says, for what one thinks in the mind one expresses in speech. 'thou art mind', he says; for what one
48 kakuha hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffaloes yoked in fours,
here, the inimical nature of kām or lust is being made even more explicit by lord krishna. kām means “desire,” duṣhpūreṇa means “insatiable,” anala means “inexhaustible.” desire overpowers the discriminatory power of the wise and lures them to fulfill it. however, the more they attempt to dowse the fire of desire, the more strongly it burns. the buddha states:na kahāpaṇa vassena, titti kāmesu vijjatiappassādā kāmā dukhā kāmā, iti viññāya paṇḍito (dhammapada verse 186) [v20]“desire burns like an unquenchable fire, which never brings happiness to anyone. the wise renounce it, knowing it to be the root of misery.” but those who do not understand this secret waste away their life in the futile pursuit of trying to satiate their lust.
without a saman there is no sacrifice. 'o agni, come hither for the feast', he says; this is the character of
they that pierce the sides, bore along the ribs, without doing injury, without causing disease, they shall run off
messengers?]! that agni who knows the way to save do i engage for this man, that he be exempt from harm!
2 these hymns brought forth for thee, o agni, laud thee for bounteous gifts, with cattle and with horses.
(with these words he puts down) on the west; the twenty-seven fold is these worlds; verily he finds
verse for sacrifice to the gods.' the theologians say, 'the gods have been sacrificed to; what gods are
he, the avenger, seeketh this man's offered gifts: this god, the source of riches, doth not flee from sin.
people in distress and succours them as they improve; he who knows thus finds support. 'her too i have
3 coming together to their common youngling both cows, fairshaped, spread forth in all directions,
constituents; (the offering) of three constituents is the whole of the sacrifice; verily he sacrifices with
all that is firm is frightened at thy coming, -the earth, the heaven, the mountain, and the forest.
the foe who is superior to him; in that (he offers) to agni, the overcomer, he repels thereby (the foe) who
they by thy mental powers were made immortal, vaisvdnara when thou shonest from thy parents.
11 ascend to-day thy splendid car, o agni, in splendour, with the holy ones around it.
aids all. 'let us praise the gods worthy of praise; let us honour those worthy of honour; let us sacrifice to
there are ten pañcadaças; the bolt is fifteenfold ; verily they take away the bolt from their rivals. the
may all the holy ones of earth and heaven, and the cow's offipring hear our invocation.
he draws cups of water; the cups are the royal consecration; the fire is the consecration; the royal
agni, our skilful vanguard, shall attack, burning, against their schemes and hostile plans! gâtavedas shall
i. invite ye indra with a song to drink your draught of soma juicel
when thou, unequalled maghavan, wast born to smite the vritras dead,
when indra's helpers fighting for the good of men, the maruts, faithful to mankind, joyed in the light.
carefully tended in his parents' bosom, calling the weapons kin, goes forth to combat.
6 so then the gods restored her, so men gave the woman back again.
15 now let your soma juice be poured; be not afraid, o kali's sons.
11 now, indra! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell high, like rivers, for the singer.
5 he rushes hurrying like a steed to soma that adorns our rite,
g ye two are firm, loose; united guard me from trouble.
9 from birth he knew even his father's bosom, he set his voices and his streams in motion;
in conclusion, shree krishna emphasizes that we should slay this enemy called lust through knowledge of the self. since the soul is a part of god, it is divine in nature. thus, the divine bliss it seeks can only be attained from a divine subject, while the objects of the world are all material. these material objects can never fulfill the innate longing of the soul and so it is futile to create desires for them. we must exert and train the intellect to think in this manner, and then use it to control the mind and the senses.this is explained very beautifully in the kaṭhopaniṣhad with the help of the model of a chariot:ātmānagvaṁ rathinaṁ viddhi śharīraṁ rathameva tubuddhiṁ tu sārathiṁ viddhi manaḥ pragrahameva chaindriyāṇi hayānāhurviṣhayānsteṣhu gocharānātmendriyamanoyuktaṁ bhoktetyāhurmanīṣhiṇaḥ (1.3.3-4) [v21]the upaniṣhads say there is a chariot, which has five horses pulling it; the horses have reins in their mouths, which are in the hands of a charioteer; a passenger is sitting at the back of the chariot. ideally, the passenger should instruct the charioteer, who should then control the reins and guide the horses in the proper direction. however, in this case, the passenger has gone to sleep, and so the horses are holding sway.in this analogy, the chariot is the body, the horses are the five senses, the reins in the mouth of the horses is the mind, the charioteer is the intellect, and the passenger seated behind is the soul residing in the body. the senses (horses) desire pleasurable things. the mind (reins) is not exercising restraint on the senses (horses). the intellect (charioteer) submits to the pull of the reins (mind). so in the materially bound state, the bewildered soul does not direct the intellect in the proper direction. thus, the senses decide the direction where the chariot will go. the soul experiences the pleasures of the senses vicariously, but these do not satisfy it. seated on this chariot, the soul (passenger) is moving around in this material world since eternity.however, if the soul wakes up to its higher nature and decides to take a proactive role, it can exercise the intellect in the proper direction. the intellect will then govern the lower self—the mind and the senses—and the chariot will move in the direction of eternal welfare. in this way, the higher self (soul) must be used to control the lower self (senses, mind, and, intellect).
i of thee, o god soma, who hast the adityas for thy troop, who knowest the heart, who belongest to the
down the breath-supporters he puts down the rain-winners, therefore the rain starts from the sky,
shall not puruvasu the singer give thee praise, o ever-prospering maghavan, mounted on thy car?
whatever the wife cooks aside from thee, (o husband), or the husband (cooks) unbeknown of thee, o wife,
arjun was struck with amazement and deep reverence on seeing that breathtaking spectacle. it struck devotional chords in his heart that evoked paroxysms of delight. the elation experienced through devotional sentiments occasionally finds expression in physical symptoms. the bhakti scriptures describe eight such symptoms, or the aṣhṭa sāttvic bhāv, that sometimes manifests in devotees when their heart gets thrilled in devotion:stambha swedo ’ tha romāñchaḥ svarabhedo ’tha vepathuḥvaivarṇyamaśhru pralaya ityaṣhṭau sātvikāḥ smṛitāḥ(bhakti rasāmṛit sindhu)[v1]“becoming stupefied, sweating, horripilation, choking of the voice, trembling, complexion becoming ashen, shedding tears, and fainting—these are the physical symptoms by which intense love in the heart sometimes manifests.” that is what arjun experienced as his hair began standing on end. bowing down in reverence with folded hands, he uttered the words that follow. what arjun said is now described in the next seventeen verses.
6 far went our earlist invocation of the gods, and won us glories that can never be surpassed.
16 the noblest svasti with abundant riches, who comes to what is good by distant pathway,may she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with us under the gods' protection
gained. he brings (the victims) up with a verse ad dressed to vayu; verily winning it from vayu he
decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses out, when ye, self. luminous, stirred
aditya cup. the aditya cup is drawn with the largest number of rcs; therefore kine axe the most
22 ye brought the horse's head, asvins, and gave it unto dadhyac the offspring of atharvan.
these must be slain by thee, malignant mortals, armed with ill arts, our quiverbearing foemen.
does not put (the cup) down, for from what is not depressed offspring are produced. he does not utter
udgithas are similar for the priests, the udgitha for the udgatrs, , the rces and the pranavas for the
the young darbha-grass burns (the serpents?), the tail of the horse, the tail of the shaggy one, the seat of the
may the fortunate one hear us and be aware of us
prosperity. he who desires cattle should offer to tvastr a horse; tvastr is the producer of pairings of
like falcons hasting eagerly to the quarry, roar loudly like the army of the maruts.
(stoma) is light; verily he attains light, and a support besides, for the twenty-one fold (stoma) is support.
18 be lord of joyous songs, o vrtra-slayer, bull dear to all, who gives the power of living.
4 like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters: the singen sought thy holy rite, o indra.
4 the swans ye have are friendly, rich in store of mcath, gold-pinioned, strong to draw, awake at early
the spell which they have put for thee into the army, that which they have put into the arrow and the weapon,
10 let these men, heroes in the fight with foemen, prevail against all godless arts of 4magic,these who ipprove the noble song i sing thee.
in the vedic tradition, food is cooked with the consciousness that the meal is for the pleasure of god. a portion of the food items is then put in a plate and a verbal or mental prayer is made for the lord to come and eat it. after the offering, the food in the plate is considered prasād (grace of god). all the food in the plate and the pots is then accepted as god’s grace and eaten in that consciousness. other religious traditions follow similar customs. christianity has the sacrament of the eucharist, where bread and wine are consecrated and then partaken. shree krishna states in this verse that eating prasād (food that is first offered as sacrifice to god) releases one from sin, while those who eat food without offering commit sin.the question may arise whether we can offer non-vegetarian items to god and then accept the remnants as his prasād. the answer to this question is that the vedas prescribe a vegetarian diet for humans, which includes grains, pulses and beans, vegetables, fruits, dairy products, etc. apart from the vedic culture, many spiritually evolved souls in the history of all cultures around the world also rejected a non-vegetarian diet that makes the stomach a graveyard for animals. even though many of them were born in meat-eating families, they gravitated to a vegetarian lifestyle as they advanced on the path of spirituality. here are quotations from some famous thinkers and personalities advocating vegetarianism:“to avoid causing terror to living beings, let the disciple refrain from eating meat… the food of the wise is that which is consumed by the sādhus; it does not consist of meat.” the buddha.“if you declare that you are naturally designed for such a diet, then first kill for yourself what you want to eat. do it, however, only through your own resources, unaided by cleaver or cudgel or any kind of ax.” the roman plutarch, in the essay, “on eating flesh.”“as long as men massacre animals, they will kill each other. indeed, he who sows the seeds of murder and pain cannot reap joy and love.” pythagoras“truly man is the king of beasts, for his brutality exceeds them. we live by the death of others. we are burial places! i have since an early age abjured the use of meat…” leonardo da vinci.“nonviolence leads to the highest ethics, which is the goal of all evolution. until we stop harming all living beings, we are all savages.” thomas edison.“flesh-eating is simply immoral, as it involves the performance of an act which is contrary to moral feeling—killing.” leo tolstoy.“it may indeed be doubted whether butchers’ meat is anywhere a necessary of life… decency nowhere requires that any man should eat butchers’ meat.” adam smith.“i look my age. it is the other people who look older than they are. what can you expect from people who eat corpses?” george bernard shaw.“a dead cow or sheep lying in a pasture is recognized as carrion. the same sort of carcass dressed and hung up in a butcher’s stall passes as food!” j. h. kellogg.“it is my view that the vegetarian manner of living, by its purely physical effect on the human temperament, would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind.” albert einstein“i do feel that spiritual progress does demand at some stage that we should cease to kill our fellow creatures for the satisfaction of our bodily wants.” mahatma gandhiin this verse, shree krishna goes further and says that even vegetation contains life, and if we eat it for our own sense enjoyment, we get bound in the karmic reactions of destroying life. the word used in the verse is ātma-kāraṇāt, meaning “for one’s individual pleasure.” however, if we eat food as remnants of yajña offered to god then the consciousness changes. we then look upon our body as the property of god, which has been put under our care for his service. and we partake of permitted food, as his grace, with the intention that it will nourish the body. in this sentiment, the entire process is consecrated to the divine. bharat muni states:vasusato kratu dakṣhau kāla kāmau dṛitiḥ kuruḥpururavā madravāśhcha viśhwadevāḥ prakīrtitāḥ [v8]“violence is caused unknowingly to living entities in the process of cooking, by the use of the pestle, fire, grinding instruments, water pot, and broom. those who cook food for themselves become implicated in the sin. but yajña nullifies the sinful reactions.”
a o god savitr, he hath declared that to thee; that do thou impel and offer.
so indra forced the engulfer to disgorgement, and slew the danava. panting against him.
the full moon (sacrifices) sacrifices with soma, rests in the chosen resting-place of the gods which is
i be extended wide, let the lord of the sacrifice be extended wide.
while all fruits and flowers grow from the same land, only the best amongst them are selected for an exhibition. similarly, everything that is manifest and unmanifest in the universe is the glory of god, but the prominent amongst them are singled out for mention as his opulence.amongst the sages in the celestial planes of existence, bhrigu is special. he possesses wisdom, glory, and devotion. lord vishnu holds the mark of his foot on his chest as a consequence of a divine pastime described in the puranas in which bhrigu tested the trinity of brahma, vishnu, and shiv. shree krishna’s glory is revealed best through him.worshippers of god in his formless aspect like to meditate on the “om” vibration, which is another vibhūti of god. shree krishna had declared previously, in verses 7.8 and 8.13, the syllable “om” to be a sacred sound. it is the anāhat nād (the sound vibration that pervades creation). it is often present in the beginning of vedic mantras for invoking auspiciousness. it is said that from the mono-syllable “om” the gayatri mantra was revealed, and from the gayatri mantra, the vedas were revealed.the himalayas are a mountain range lying at the north of india. since ages, they have inspired spiritual awe and wonder in billions of devotees. their atmosphere, environment, and solitude are conducive to the performance of austerities for spiritual progress. thus, many great sages reside in the himalayas in their subtle bodies, practicing penance for their own advancement and for the benefit of humankind. and so, of the multitude of mountain ranges in this world, the himalayas best display his opulence.yajña is the act of dedicating ourselves to the supreme. the simplest of all yajñas is the chanting of the holy names of god. this is called japa yajña, or the sacrifice of the devotional repetition of the divine names of god. for the practice of ritualistic yajñas, a number of rules are applicable, all of which need to be meticulously followed. however, in japa yajña, there are no rules. it can be done anywhere and at any time, and is more purifying than the other forms of yajñas. in the present age of kali, the chanting of the names of god is even more emphasized.kalijuga kevala nāma ādhārā, sumiri sumiri nara utarahiṅ pārā (ramayan)[v28]“in the age of kali, the chanting and remembrance of the names of god is the most powerful means of crossing the ocean of material existence.”
pegs to the kindling-wood; verily he attains what cannot be taken away. (the pegs) are of açvattha
granting him sons and lineal succession, let us not, bold ones! move the gods to anger.
4 malignities stay not from wealth the mortal man whom, agni, thou
are not combined. he pours water over; therefore the vital airs are moist within. (the water) he pours is
we sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises: thou filledst heaven and earth, god meet for
should not choose a natural fissure, for that is the colour of guilt. he appealed to the trees, 'take a third
29 rbhuksan, not to be restrained, who strengthened tugra's son in lauds,
ruddy (cows); surya in unison with the steed; the açvins in unison
says thus. speech aforetime spoke without discrimination; the gods said to indra, 'do thou discriminate
confers radiance upon him; just as yonder sun is radiant, so he is radiant among men. he puts down ghee
formerly born, and the latter born! the varana shall watch over thee!
like a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath stepped forth from the great enclosure:
3 great is, in truth, the number of the mornings which were aforetime at the sun's uprising.
wherever, o agni gâtavedas, thou perceivest the brood of these hidden devourers (atrin), do thou, mightily
e'en from his birth-time indra conquered tvastar, bore off the soma and in beakers drank it.
so he, who on this tenth day, the avivakya, comes to grief, is left out. if one points out (an error) to one
a priest with purifying tongue, o agni, sacrifice with thy mouth to thine own body.
may the enemy not win the debate! thou art mighty and overpowering. overcome the debate of those that
(from heaven), and for support. having prospered in either world they cease (the rite). the (nights) are
the kingdom he wins the king dom for him; he becomes the kingdom. they should be offered for
whom strong and vigorous and swiftlymoving, subdued by love, the deities gave to surya.
7 ye by your wisdom brought a cow from out a hide; unto that ancient pair ye gave again their youth.
eager for the gods, do thou sacrifice to them with oblation;
eastward the ladle goes that brings all blessing, praising the godswith homage and oblation.
7 him, for his ample bounty, him, this indra do i urge to drink,
never reached,not, when in joy he fights the stayer of the rain: thou, and none else, hast made all things in order due.
surrounds the year on both sides. to the kingly class falls the blessing of the part of the sacrifice which
who, fair-faced, favours him who presses soma with stones made ready, he, o men, is indra.
4 your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye, heroes, grant your gifts.
5 like youthful women without brothers, straying, like dames who hate their lords, of evil conduct,
.18 sukta 18 – charm to remove evil bodily characteristics from a woman
the fire is threefold; verily be makes the whole extent of the fire attain support. 'enkindled, o agni,
35 thou, pavamana, sendest food and power in streams. thou sittest in the beakers as a hawk on
when we do our swa-dharma (prescribed occupational duties), there is a two-fold advantage. it is in tune with our disposition. hence, it is as natural to our personality as flying is to a bird and swimming is to a fish. secondly, since it is comfortable to the mind, it can almost be done involuntarily, and the consciousness becomes free to be engaged in devotion. instead, if we abandon our duties thinking them to be defective, and take up another’s duties unsuitable for our nature, we struggle against the innate inclination of our personality. this was exactly arjun’s situation. his kshatriya nature was inclined to military and administrative activities. events drove him to a situation where it was necessary to participate in a war of righteousness. if he were to shirk from his duty and withdraw from the battlefield to practice austerities in the forest, it would not help him spiritually, for even in the forest, he would not be able to get away from his inherent nature. in all likelihood, he would gather the tribal people in the jungle and become their king. instead, it would be better for him to continue doing his duty born of his nature, and worship god by offering the fruits of his works to him. when one becomes spiritually accomplished the swa-dharma changes. it no longer remains at the bodily platform; it becomes the dharma of the soul, which is devotion to god. at that stage, one is justified in giving up occupational duties and engaging wholeheartedly in devotion because that is now the swa-dharma of one’s nature. for people with that eligibility, shree krishna will give the final conclusion in the end of the bhagavad gita: “give up all varieties of dharmas and simply surrender unto me.” (18.66) however, until that stage is reached, the instruction given in this verse applies. thus, the śhrīmad bhāgavatam states: tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā mat-kathā-śhravaṇādau vā śhraddhā yāvan na jāyate (11.20.9)[v23] “we must keep doing our prescribed occupational duties as long as the taste for devotion through hearing, chanting, and meditating on the leelas of god has not developed.”
13 indra and agni, i will call you hither and make you joyful with the gifts i offer.
they fasten a (beast) for killing in front; (verily it serves) for distinction. 'fear not men', (with these
verily from him he smites away the evil one. 'we have come to the highest light', he says; the highest
yet torturing cares consume me as the wolf assails the thirsty deer. mark this my woe, ye earth and
as he ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels pressed close on mudgalani.
to him who shines afar, vaisvanara, shall bards give precious things that he may go on certain
14 so, indra, form us brilliant holy singers for strength, for glory, and for food and riches.
13 with new protections, indra, like an archer, open thou forus
thee claiming worship, bearing it to gods -. there nigh to thee sate all the holy ones.
the sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the car-horse to the resting places.
swift soma drops have been effused in streams of meath, the gladdening drink,
the two hornless tawny ones for the all-gods; the speckled for the maruts; the black goat for agni the
pressed for the gladdening draught the drops flow forth abundantly with song, flow onward with the stream of
5 now, praised, o ancient king! fill thou the singer with plenteous food that he may deal forth
when in his arms they laid the bolt, he slaughtered the dasyus and cast down their forts of iron.
the invulnerable demon's head thou clavest when thou wouldst win the praise of atithigva.
create offspring; in that there is the ilamda, they take away from the offspring which has been created
for food, flow onward with thy stream, cleansed and made bright by sapient men: indu. with sheen
25 over the cleansing sieve have flowed the pavamanas in a stream,
our cattle.' they praised agni; be praised by them delivered their cattle from night to day; the gods
5 i pour to him who looks in all directions: may he accept it with a friendly spirit.
who (piles it) according to the deity does not fall a victim to the deities; he becomes richer. with a
9 i send sweet speech to indra and to agni: with hymns i speed it like a boat through waters.
produces, and in offspring when produced by kuhu he places speech. these (offerings) also should he
or in the rivers' compass, or in the abode of ample heaven.
that, like a hawk affrighted through the regions, thou crossedst nine-and-ninety flowing rivers?
befalls him; he prospers and his enemy is defeated. stoma serves stoma; verily he makes his enemy his
and trasadasyu when the forts were shattered down,-come hither unto us, o asvins, with those aids.
hither hath come this amulet of parna-wood, with its might mightily crushing the enemy. (it is) the strength of
9 agni, men seek thee as a father with their prayers, win thee, bright-formed, to brotherhood with holy
thy might, o indra, fain to slay the dragon, was set firm in heaven, lauding thine own imperial sway.
divine and foeless aditi quickly listens. may these deliver us unharmed from trouble.
5 of whom, the terrible, they ask, where is he? or verily they say of him, he is not.
these are the sons of angirases: from agni have they sprung to life.
coloured like gold he rests in seats where mitra dwells, the steer made beautiful by rivers and by
maghavan in his bended arm supports him: he slays, unasked, the men who hate devotion.
who tells the lofty birth of him the lofty one, shall verily surpass in glory e'en his peer.
whether thou art burning, whether thou art scorching, or whether thou art the son of king varuna, hrûdu by
shree krishna tells arjun that the ancient science being imparted to him is an uncommonly known secret. secrecy in the world is maintained for two reasons: either due to selfishness in keeping the truth to oneself, or to protect the abuse of knowledge. the science of yog remains a secret, not for either of these reasons, but because it requires a qualification to be understood. that qualification is revealed in this verse as devotion. the deep message of the bhagavad gita is not amenable to being understood merely through scholasticism or mastery of the sanskrit language. it requires devotion, which destroys the subtle envy of the soul toward god and enables us to accept the humble position as his tiny parts and servitors.arjun was a fit student of this science because he was a devotee of the lord. devotion to god can be practiced in any of the five sequentially higher bhāvas, or sentiments: 1) śhānt bhāv: adoring god as our king. 2) dāsya bhav: the sentiment of servitude toward god as our master. 3) sakhya bhāv: considering god as our friend. 4) vātsalya bhāv: considering god as our child. 5) mādhurya bhāv: worshipping god as our soul-beloved. arjun worshipped god as his friend, and so shree krishna speaks to him as his friend and devotee.without a devotional heart, one cannot truly grasp the message of the bhagavad gita. this verse also invalidates the commentaries on the bhagavad gita written by scholars, jñānīs, yogis, tapasvīs, etc., who lack bhakti (devotion) toward god. according to this verse, since they are not devotees, they cannot comprehend the true import of the supreme science that was revealed to arjun, and hence their commentaries are inaccurate and/or incomplete.
covering metre; the mind metre; the expanse metre; the river metre; the sea metro; the water metre; the
the ajas and the sigrus and the yaksus brought in to him as tribute heads of horses.
3 wise, ne.'er deceived, uncircumscribed, refulgent, our gracious guest, a friend with good attendants,
who will loose these for thee without a battle? yea, and sharp-pointed are our warlike weapons.
rudras, and adityas guarded it. it produced for the vasus, rudras, and adityas (each) three hundred and
has four syllables; 'utter' has two syllables; 'we that do utter' has five syllables; the vasat has two
when, indra, thunderer, marut-girt, thou slewest vrtra in thy strength, lauding thine own imperial sway.
4 brhaspati, when first he had his being from mighty splendour in supremest heaven,
3 friendship with indra have the rbhus, fully gained: grandsons of manu, they skilfully urged the work.
that he puts these down, he unites these with (the waters) of the sky; parjanya becomes likely to rain .
gods, after reciting the kindling-verses, could not discern the sacrifice; prajapati silently performed
soon as the sun hath risen i sing to you, to mitra, varuna,
quaff them and satisfy therewith thy longing; then fix thy mind upon bestowing treasure.
6 with passion pavamana longs for the great lofty pair, well-formed
reverence, o prâna, to thy roaring (wind), reverence, o prâna, to thy thunder, reverence, o prâna, to thy
that which he knows is truth and never idle: he wins and gives the wealth desired of many.
yon fluttering little spirit that has been fixed into thy heart, from it the jealousy do i remove, as air from a waterskin.
full companies have followed for thy friendship: the pattern of thy vigour gods have copied.
14 what time thou settest near the sun thy body, thy form, immortal one, is seen expanding:
13 the visvamitras have sung forth this prayer to indra thunder-aimed:
with thy wealth-procuring, great, golden hook, o indra, husband of sakî, procure a wife for me that desireth a
atmosphere; verily he puts down the atmosphere . he makes the horse sniff it; verily he puts breath in
the end of sacrifice or its inception; yea, thou endowest him with power and riches.
he, who yokes agni where the yoking is to be performed, yokes him (best) among those who are
what time thou holpest kutsa's son, when dasyus fell, yea, holpest kutsa's darling when the dasyus
k homage to the maker of health, and to the maker of delight.
5 just at this time of the day and the night thy look is the sweetest .
o mitra-varuna, guard and protect me here: let not that come to me which nests within and
may the wind blow upon our cows with healing: may they eat herbage full of vigorous juices.
n come forward, irresistible, along the stream of ghee, with offspring, with increase of wealth.
may india, soma-drinker, go before us, bull who gives us peace.
.5.3 mantra 3: the pan, the head of the man, and the vamabhrt brick
2 indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, and then in splendour came to us.
here he wins wholesome food to feed this body: as for mine old age, nirrti consume it
to agni of the front the red-limbed ox; the two spotted below for savitr; the two red-navelled for pusan;
in whom, purifying, good things are placed, even as the heaven and earth (support) all beings.
21 one morn ye strengthened vaga for the battle, to gather spoils that might be told in thousands.
5 yet verily the warrior in his vigorous strength stirreth up with his might great battles for mankind;
sacrifice. again this is the form of the sacrifice; verily he wins the sacrifice by its form. 'may for me the
7 o rudras, quickly we desire your succour for this work of ours.
by songs a poet and a sage by wisdom, soma joes singing through the cleansing filter.
people whose minds are attached to sensual enjoyment concern themselves with bhog (gratification), and aiśhwarya (luxury). they engage their intellects in enhancing their income and contemplating how to increase their material possessions and maximize their enjoyment. bewildered in this manner, they are unable to develop the firm resolve required for traversing the path to god-realization.
breast, ye gods shall greet with sounds of satisfaction this (porridge)!
she, the coy dame, was filled with dew prolific: with adoration men approached to praise her.
11 ye who are youthful, wise, and meet for worship, come, martits, to the longing of the singer.
7 from far away, from heaven, the redhued noted sage, steer of the triple height, hath sung unto the
4 absorbed into the heart, be sweet, o indu, as a kind father to his son, o soma,
agni hath put that right, all-knower, he who belongeth to all men;
2 to thee i offer reverent speech: accept it: to thee who markest it, victorious, faithful!
2 the dames of trita with the stones onward impel this tawny one
4 songs have outpoured themselves to thee, indra, the strong, the guardian lord,
joy, mightiest indra, that perceives, sprung from deep soma draughts, whereby
15 indra is vrtra-slayer, guard, our best defender from the foe.
2 agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of the flesh,
three regions are constructed after the pattern of the brâhmana: yonder heaven, the earth, and the
9 him who waylays, yea, him who would destroy us,-aim at him, pierce him with thy sharpened
night the raksases are active; verily he smites them when active; he should offer in (a place) which is
o thou art the measure of a thousand, thou art the image of a thousand, thou art the size of a thousand,
it the full moon has indra. there are curds for indra at the new moon; verily the new moon has indra. he
2 thou, verily, indra, gavest help to kutsa, willingly giving car to him in battle,
with cunning, rbhus, rich in treasure, fashioned the two swift tawny steeds who carry indra.
thereby his foes; in that (he offers) to indra, the powerful, he bestows thereby power upon himself; he
'for those of good fruits thee, for the plants', he says. therefore plants bear fruit. if he were to scratch
when two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to face in war,
d 'homage to rudra, slayer of makha; for this homage guard me' (with these words he reverences) the
in his customary style, shree krishna now winds up the topic of the field and the knower of the field by summing up all that he has said. true knowledge is to know the distinction between the material kṣhetra (field of activity) and the spiritual kṣhetrajña (knower of the field). those possessing such discriminative knowledge do not look upon themselves as the material body. they identify with their spiritual nature as souls and tiny parts of god. hence, they seek the path of spiritual elevation and release from material nature. then, by treading on the path of spiritual enlightenment, such persons of wisdom attain their ultimate goal of god-realization.
behind, as (the hunter) that follows the trail of a wounded (animal).
3 he bent his eye upon the dying mother: my word i now withdraw. that way i follow.
well-weaponed soma, pour to us a stream of riches doubly great;
7 flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, she moves along her ample volumes through the
burn him not up, nor quite consume him, agni: let not his body or his skin be scattered.
grant us protection, o ye gracious goddesses, ye who are on the earth or in the waters' realm.
6 with might hath indra spread out heaven and earth, with power hath indra lighted up the sun.
the stotra of the yajñayajñiya; the sacrifice is as great as is the agnistoma; a further extension is
thou mayest carry it: of these (the waters) thou shalt take such as are fit for sacrifice; having intelligently divided
3 round the oblations hath he paced, agni the wise, the lord of strength,
54 eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake and prsana, wrought in battle.
16 these two united paths bear him who journeys born from the head and pondered with the spirit
rite, and three in the ahina, the sacrifice would be upset. there are three upasads in the one-day rite,
some, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the hymn to thee for mighty strength and
çitra desirous of cattle is propagated with offspring, with cattle, with pairings. with the offering to agni
him who makes many sacrifices. he should repeat indefinitely to win that which is not definite.
as many as might be the case, 'let us perform (the rite) for these months, the eleventh and the twelfth,
subduing all, he keeps his ground and flinches not, from the skilled archer flinches not.
26 when vrtra, stayer of the floods, thou si"est, thundeicr with might,
9 hear us, o agni, in your common dwelling: harness thy rapid car of amrta.
the treasurer shall fetch this treasure: all outsiders round about shall not control it! the heaven-directed
sacrificer, the mortar offspring; if he were to pile it with three layers, he would obstruct the sacrifice, the
a man call agni to protect when sacrifice is well prepared.
sûrya (the sun) surveys the sky, sûrya the earth, sûrya the waters. sûrya is the single eye of being: he has
4 the maruts spread the mist abroad and make mountains rock and reel,
18 aryaman, aditi deserve our worship: the laws of varuna remain unbroken.
robed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the lord of might whose friendship gives a dwelling.
may we win offspring, may we procure offspring, may we possess offspring.' they saw this (rite) of
these creatures all together shall yield milk for us; do thou, o earth, give us the honey of speech!
verily he has recourse to the plants with their own share; verily they from his own self beget him
13 go never to the feast of one who harms us, the treacherous neighbour or. unworthy kinsman.
5 the brahmacari goes engaged in duty: he is a member of the gods' own body.
that in thy joy thou maysi scatter thy gifts o'er us, plenteously, even as the dust.
to the gods, verily, he gives rich treasure, and blesses him who calls them to the banquet.
much-lauded! help us with thy power to riches: may i be sharer of thy godlike favour.
dabhiti lit the flame for thee, and worshipped with fuel, hymns, poured soma, dressed oblations.
2 by praise-songs of angirases exalted, may!he gods come to us with their protection.
plants the fifth; for the year the sixth; for the maruts the seventh; for brhaspati the eighth; for mitra the
11 in houses first he sprang into existence, at great heaven's base, and in this region's bosom;
.90 sukta 90 – charm against internal pain (colic), due to the missiles of rudra
4 may savitar the god, o stones, stir you as law commands for him
the brahmans with their hymns exalting indra increased his strength that he might slaughter ahi.
yearning with love both worlds approached, the waters waited on indra when he first had being.
may their weapons fall from their (hands), may they be unable to lay the arrow on (the bow)! and then (our)
when indra and the dragon strove in battle, maghavan gained the victory for ever.
m thou containest all life, strengthen the earth; thou restest firm, strengthen the atmosphere; thou restest
8 here flows asmanvati: hold fast each other, keep yourselves up, and pass, my friends, the river.
hand the world has no sympathy for the rich person who does not give.
11 call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the foemen, those
possesses an oblation holder. he offers the agnihotra morn and evening, he offers the new and the full
support in the fire which he has piled. he who first piles (the fire) should pile in five layers; the sacrifice
that deity, in the manner of angiras, do thou sit firm,' he says; this is the support of the bricks; he who
him with the puronuvakya, leads him forward with the yajya, and makes him go with the vasat call. he
to concludethis chapter shree krishna uses the word iti in this verse, which means “these”. this is to imply that, “arjun, here i have given you the gist of all the hidden knowledge of the vedic scriptures. from the description of the nature of thisworld to the differentiation between matter and spirit. finally, the realization of the absolute truthabout oneself and the supreme divine personality, god. i assure you thatwhoever espouses this knowledge will be truly enlightened. their deeds and endeavours will be definitely fruitful and take them towards their ultimate goal, which is god-realization.”
regarding whom they have doubts as to (admitting him to) common meals or to marriage. it should be
6 he who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thousand mighty men of war.
been rendered impotent. the mountain that grows poisonous plants has been rendered impotent.
bring him the juice poured forth in sacrifice to-day! now range you by the glorious one!
the silent offering; in that silently he performs the libation of ghee, he takes away the sacrifice of his foe.
as one victorious unsubdued in battle, pour forth wealth to us:
h may the bull, wide extending, afford us protection rich in food,
cattle from a place of sacrifice elevated in one place. it should be elevated between the seat and the
22 o asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and praises, honour you:
7 wherewith ye gave gucanti wealth and happy home, and made the fiery pit friendly for atri's sake;
8 when he unbars the spaces of the mountains, and quickens with his floods the water-torrents,
the hind part. then the gods prospered, the asuras were defeated; in that he makes portions of three
11 agni, beheld by us in nearest neighbourhood, accordant with the gods, bring us, with gracious love,
become blind, the raksases would injure the sacrifice . he puts gold down on it before making the
vaiçvanara; (the year) which he yokes he lets go with its own share, for support; the rope with which he
confusion. (the offering) to vaiçvanara is on twelve potsherds; the year has twelve months; verily by
death who has come for help. therefore in (the cup) for the wives for tvastr also a drawing is made. he
4 be thou for us a liberal prince, giver and lord of precious things.
5 they purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve.
hail! return with soma as thy comrade, with wealth', he says, verily having purchased by means of
19 -may agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, blessed one, and sacrifice bring bliss;
sacrificial fee is a black hornless (cow). to agni (he offers) on eight potsherds in the house of the leader
when we invoke thee, god grain, and thou dost listen, then do thou raise thyself up like the sky, be
shine forth enkindled, radiant one. sit in the chamber of the law, sit in the chamber of the food.
to whom, adityas, ye have lent your shelter that extendeth far.
unquelled in fight the hero leads his army with the warrior chiefs,
ye heard the weakling's wife, as 'twere an order, and gave to her a son hiranyahasta.
4 happily work our steers and men, may the plough furrow happily.
support, the end of the sacrifice reaches the end with a secure and uninjured sacrifice. 'do thou
i would support the singer, god who scatterest wealth! and, not abandon him to woe.
i knew, and, warned thee, on that day. thou wouldst not hear me. what sayest thou, when naught
he who desires cattle should offer an oblation to indra; cattle are connected with indra; verily he has
to us the mighty, lying in all vital power, who resteth in the deep, who standeth in the east.
the plants whose father was the sky, whose mother the earth, whose root the (heavenly) ocean--may those
10 help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, this eulogy to rudra, him
auspicious is the aspect of vadhryasva's fire good is its guidance, pleasant are its visitings.
'this is your oblation, o brâhmanas,' thus shall he reflect, if he is supplicated, if they ask him for the sterile
a share. 'thee offered to the lord of the sadas i eat', he says, for completion.' (the food) is divided. in
5 bring us that wondrous bounty, dawn, that shall be famed most far away.
what time ye carried bhujyu to his dwelling, borne in a ship with hundred oars, o asvins.
children; and may i never fail to be worshipful to you.
even the liberal wards not off those fierce ones, those who are light and agile in their greatness.
your car, assuming many a shape, most often goes to the soma-presser's place of meeting.
ukthya, with the trayastrinça (stoma) with verses addressed to the all-gods, for rest. there is an
for the offering-spoons, in the chip for the post. when the soma sacrifice is complete he casts (in the
last; verily he confers on the metres the glory of the sacrifice. if he desire, 'may i confer on the sacrificer
to us be born a son and spreading offspring. agni, be this thy gracious will to us-word.
soon as they see the furious combat raging, men speak forth praises of my vigorous horses.
he.glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and like a playful horse the tawny steer hath run.
9 let him not love to speak ill words: but fear the one who holds all four
shall be summoned, o indra and agni', he says; verily he wins might and force. 'this is thy due place of
sacrifice. 'it was the twelve "calf-binders" which supported it', they say. therefore with twelve those
thou ever wast the treasure-lord of treasures: indra, thou lettest all folk share thy bounty.
upon the head of the nimble antelope a remedy grows! he has driven the kshetriya (inherited disease) in all
all gods of one accord, with one intention, move unobstructed to a single purpose.
2 even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men's conqueror, bounteous like a cow;
b he who piles the fire after announcing to prajapati does not go to ruin. the horses should stand on
contain the word 'head'; therefore the head (of the fire) is in front. five he puts down in the right hip,
your giant steeds move on, sprung from the waters, like ancient times of varuna the mighty.
the drops poured forth have made him glad: pay reverence to his might supreme.
3 when what is strong ye overthrow, and whirl about each ponderous thing,
he must hold it when he calls; verily he loses not his own. if he begins the litany without placing the
12 vouchsafe us ever, as man needs, o vasu, abundant wealth of kine for son and offspring.
help, as thou gavest rugama and syavaka and svarnara and krpa aid.
like stags the sons of dyatis have striven onward, the sons of aditi grown strong like pillars.
with the gods; he offers on the southern half; this is the quarter of the pitrs; verily in their own quarter he
each god to bring you help, each god to strengthen you.
19 o asvins, with that glorious fame come hither, through our brilliant song,
makes them go to the world of heaven. 'there rejoice on the height of the earth ', he says, for the place of
to thee i say it who hast eyes and hearest: touch not our offspring, injure not our heroes.
is not cut off from the pavamanas. 'thou art the hawk, with the gayatri for thy metre; i grasp thee; bring
slayer of vritra, mount thy car! the bay steeds have been yoked by prayer.
whoso enkindles thee, with lifted ladle, and thrice this day offiers thee food, o agni,
prajapati saw the viraj; by it he created the past and the future; he concealed it from the rsis; by
the castles of the dasyus. with it those that hate me do thou slay!
should offer a cake on eight potsherds to agni, the burnt; verily he pacifies him with his own share, and
4 before the high god, at his birth, heaven trembled, earth, many floods and all the precipices.
3 refulgent from the bosom of the mornings, he in whom singers take delight ascendeth.
as 'twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy songs resound in joy. he with the ruddy-hued,
e this thus should the sacrificer himself pile; if another pile his fire, if he should not prosper him with
3 soma flows on when purified, beloved and adorned with songs,
flow of blood attacks the cattle-owner from the spot where her dung is deposited: this understanding there is
they have embraced within themselves all energies, which, issuing forth, again into their bodies pass.
6 o fair of face, beautiful is thine aspect when, very near at hand, like gold thou gleamest,
3 early ye sing forth praise as with a herald's voice, and, meet for worship, go each morning to the
9 he, unopposed, is master of the riches.of his own subjects and of hostile people.
6 straightway the rudras, maruts visiting all men, falcons of dyaus, home-dwellers with the asura,varuna, mitra, aryaman look on with these, and the swift-moving indra with swift-moving gods.
11 the pressing-stones are set at work: the meath is poured into the tank,
slaying both kinds of foe, may we, o hero, be happy, helped by thee, with ample riches.
who with their rush o'erthrow as 'twere a sinner the mortal who would fight with those who love him
no brother, kin, or friend to him who pours not, destroyer of the dumb who would resist him.
come, agni, praised with song, to feast and sacrificial offering: sit
indra and agni, surely ye as conquerors will give us wealth,
in this, or is it not, thine hero exploit, indra? declare it at the proper season.
even soma, lord of opulence, the friend of indra, day by day.
c o agni, lead us by a fair path to wealth,
g homage to him of the lake, and to him of the whirlpool.
11 now, lauded for thine aid, heroic indra, sped by our prayer, wax mighty in thy body.
consecrated were to leave the consecration-shed, it would be as when a foetus falls from the womb. he
verse for harmony; to agni with the vasus he offered a cake on eight potsherds, to soma with the
the cosmic play of the various planes of existence in the universe is astounding. the fourteen worlds and their planetary systems undergo repeated cycles of sṛiṣhṭi, sthiti,andpralaya (creation, preservation, and dissolution). all planetary systems, up to the mahar lok, are destroyed at the end of a kalp; that is brahma’s day of 4.32 billion years. this partial dissolution is called naimittik pralaya. when shukdev paramhans narrated the shrimad bhagavatam to parikshit, he stated that brahma creates these worlds similar to a child playing with his toys. a child builds structures with his toys during the day and pulls them apart before going to bed at night. similarly, when brahma wakes up, he creates the planetary systems and their life forms and dissolves them before going to sleep.the entire universe dissolves at the end of brahma’s life of 100 years (311.04 trillion earth years). the whole material creation winds up. thepañch-mahābhūtamerge into thepañch-tanmātrās, thepañch-tanmātrāsmerge intoahankār,ahankārmerges intomahān, andmahānmerges intoprakṛiti. prakṛitiis the subtle form of maya, the material energy of god.maya now takes up her primordial form. she goes back into the body of the supreme lord, maha vishnu. this great dissolution is called prākṛit pralaya, ormahāpralaya. when it is time for the next cycleof creation, maha vishnu glances at prakṛiti, and by his mere glance, prakṛiti starts unfolding herself again. fromprakṛiti,mahānis created, frommahān,ahankār; then fromahankār,pañch-tanmātrāsare created; frompañch-tanmātrās,pañch-mahābhūtaget created. and by this process, unlimited universes are created again.according to modern science, there are 100 billion stars in the milky way. and similar to the milky way, there are over a billion galaxies in the universe. thus, scientists have concluded that in our universe, there are more than 10^20 stars. however, the vedas state that, similar to our universe, there are infinite universes of various sizes and different features. these universes manifest from the body of maha vishnu. every time he breathes in infinite universes are created from the pores of his divine body. and when he breathes out, they dissolve again. thus, one breath of maha vishnu is equal to 100 years of brahma’s life. also, all these universes have their own brahma, vishnu, and shankar. in the innumerable universes, there are innumerable brahmas, vishnus, and shankars. the entire creation originates from maha vishnu, andat dissolution, merges back into him.
verily he will hear and mark this word of ours: we will pour indra forth as 'twere a spring of wealth.
production of offspring is light. agni is the light of the gods; the viraj is the light of the metres. the
the twelve nights' (rite) is prajapati in twelve divisions. the two sides are the atiratras, the eight
impetuous as a bear, o maruts, is youi rush terrible as a dreadful bull..
metres departed from the gods (saying), 'we will not carry your oblation without sharing (in it)'; for
another, and with them all equally prospered. those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of thirty-three
11 god, sovran of the wood, present this our oblation to the gods,
the chariot of the gods is yoked for the world of heaven, the chariot of man for wherever his intention is
d to the sky thee, to the atmosphere thee, to the earth thee!
sing forth and laud with sacred song most active pavamana, laud
15 the hero pathya kindled thee the dasyus'. most destructive foe,
7 lovely of form art thou, alike on every side; though far, thou shinest brightly
may we, adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that which shall bring us greater bliss.
n do thou with good labour elaborate this offering for the gods.
and all our enemies, who near or far away prevail against us, crush, and leave them destitute.
4 let them go forth, the strong, as flames of fire with might. gathered for victory they have yoked their
indra shall confuse the army, the miaruts shall slay it with might! agni shall rob it of its sight; vanquished it shall
will not the rapid son of waters make them lovely, for he it is who shall enjoy them?
a woman may lose her husband to death. such a woman may find a new husband and dedicate her love to
metre. in that there is (an offering) on twelve potsherds, the jagati has twelve syllables, and the third
the thousand-eyed god shall put this plant into my right hand: with that do i see every one, the sûdra as well
6 the waters have their healing power, the waters drive disease away.
'ye are the two feet of the sacrifice', he says, for these are the two feet of the sacrifice ; and also (it
3 he, shining in his splendour, stands high over all things that existsoma, a god as surya is.
should offer to the all-gods (a beast) of many forms; his relatives are connected with the all-gods;
4 this is thine own. thou drawest near, as turns a pigeon to his mate:
there are two sattras of the gods, that of twelve days and that of thirty-three days. those, who knowing
the poison infused by the serpent that is striped across, by the black serpent, and by the adder; that poison of
7 who knows what vital ower he wins, drinking beside the flowing juice?
downfall. he is in favor with neither god nor men. the rich person who does not share is a sinner.
3 indra, thou settest free the many waters that were encompassed, hero, by the dragon.
thou, indra, whom our hearts praise highly in the war, grant shelter, maghavan, to us who love thee
he closes with a tristubh, the tristubh is power and strength; verily he establishes the sacrifice on power
9 let the ascending drops attain to thee, the wondrous god, in heaven:
thou hast made herbs to grow for our enjoyment: yea, thou hast won thee praise from living creatures.
32 drive from us with thy tongue, o god, the man who doeth evil deeds,
o vayu, drinker of the pure, be near us: a thousand teams are thine, allbounteous giver.
26 o indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons.
we speak to the heavens, and the stars, to earth, the yakshas, and the mountains; to the seas.. the rivers,
6 come hither. i am all thine own; advancing turn thou to me, victorious, all-supporter!
looker on heavenly light, lord of this moving world, lord, indra, of what moveth not!
21 pass him who psours libations out in angry mood or after sin:
him, blazing agni! who hath worked us mischief, consume thou utterly like dried-up stubble.
wishing to do thee service, agni, they are there, desirous of thy friendship grant them store of wealth.
7 men beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be beautified,
farther than the near', he says, for he finds it nearer than the farther, farther than the near. 'i welcome
by means of the invigorating gangida, bestowed by the gods as an amulet, do we conquer in battle the
the gods, indra and agni, may i be powerful and an eater of food', he says; verily he becomes powerful
3 bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him in want of food and feeble.
him free, for support. the vow if not released is liable to consume (the sacrificer); 'o agni, lord of
the sacrificial cakes in each of the pressings; verily they win the deities who share in the pressing from
the ten swift fingers deck thee forth seven ministers impel thee on,
8 the healing virtues of the plants stream forth like cattle from the stall,plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital breath, o man.
e may she hurt thee not; may she hurt me not.
the thousand is divided into three parts at the three-night festival; verily he makes her possessed of a
9 we seek to gain the friendly love of thee that strong and mighty one,
varuna on ten potsherds, to sarasvati an oblation, to agni and visnu on eleven potsherds; verily he
they who spat upon the brâhmana, who desired tribute from him, they sit in the middle of a pool of blood,
to him like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to agni let the lauds go forth.
'this is thy tristubh, jagati, part', say for me to soma.
12 his portion is exceeding great like a victorious soldier's spoil.
2 o lord of this dwelling! be our protector and preserver. augment our wealth. may we, through your
food is cattle, he takes it himself; verily by himself he fills his desires of cattle, for no one else can grant
not stirred to anger, o wide-ruler, come to us, come thou to us in every fight.
3 best giver of delight, he flows to indra's throat, robing himself in might, auspicious one, for fame.
in the close fray thou rentest him: thou stolest the sun's wheel and didst drive away misfortunes.
so worshipping and lauding thee for favour i watch for thee as for the stalk of soma.
all glories and all nourishment, lords of all wealth! depend on you.
that deed they count a glorious deed, though small to thee, a glorious deed.
28 as to varosusaman thou broughtest great riches, for their gain,
with the shell which was born in the sea, at the head of bright substances, we slay the rakshas and conquer
o indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the soma set before thee.
4 o undivided heaven and earth, preserve us, us, lofty ones! your nobiy-born descendants.
two worlds burst apart; in that he says, 'o agni, come hither for enjoyment', it is for the separation
of cattle; verily by the symbol he wins cattle . the sacrifice went away from the gods in the form of
greater are ye than rivers and than mountains, o indra-agni, and all things beside them.
this (lead) overcomes the vishkandha, this smites the devouring demons (atrin); with this i have overwhelmed
new moon passes over the offering either at the new or the full moon; he wanders from the path on a
with these, o son of strength, o jatavedas, guard us, preserve these princes and the singers.
34 what time her husband's perfect restoration to his lost strength and manhood was apparent,
the fire approaches a woman; with clotted curds for mitra and varuna he should sacrifice; verily he
as the elephant directs his steps after the steps of the female, as the heart of the lusty male hankers after the
these songs, o soma-drinker, cheered by soma, indra, accept from thy most zealous poet.
4 thee, best of vrtra-slayers, thee who shakest off our dasyu foes:
diminishing the days of human creatures, the lady shines with all her lover's splendour.
the spring-water yonder which runs down upon the mountain, that do i render healing for thee, in order that
hither, that i may live, i call unto the feast your wondrous car, thought-swift, borne on by rapid
6 to me, weak, innocent, thou, luminous agni, bast boldly given as 'twere a heavy burthen,
10 to the wise man, o sage and sovran ruler, the man who knoweth all thine ancient exploits.
upon hearing the science of karm-yog, people often wonder that if they give up attachment to results, will their performance go down? shree krishna explains that working without personal motivation does not reduce the quality of our work; instead we become even more skillful than before. consider the example of a sincere surgeon who cuts people with his knife while operating upon them. he performs his duty with equanimity, and is undisturbed irrespective of whether the patient survives or dies. this is because he is merely doing his duty unselfishly, to the best of his ability, and is not attached to the results. hence, even if the patient dies while being operated upon, the surgeon does not feel guilty of murder. however, if the same surgeon’s only child needs to be operated, he does not have the courage to do so. because of attachment to the results, he fears he will not be able to perform the operation skillfully, and so he seeks the help of another surgeon. this shows that attachment to results does not make us more skillful; rather, the attachment affects our performance adversely. instead, if we work without attachment, we can do so at our maximum skill level, without feeling nervous, jittery, scared, tense, or excited.likewise, arjun’s personal example also illustrates the point that giving up attachment to the fruits does not adversely affect performance. before hearing the bhagavad gita, he intended to engage in war with the desire of winning a kingdom. after hearing the bhagavad gita from shree krishna, he was fighting because it was his duty to god, and shree krishna would be pleased by it. he was still a warrior; however, his internal motivation had changed. the fact that he did his duty without attachment did not make him any less competent than before. in fact, he fought with greater inspiration because his work was directly in service of god.
this great goddess earth, kindly disposed, shall receive the (sacrificial) skin! then may we go to the world of
none violates his holy ordinances: that we are his the heavens and earth acknowledge.
3 here on their path the noble gods proceeded: in the wide firmament the beauteous decked them.
stand with the sacred cord suspended from the right shoulder (prâkinopavita), saying, 'o pragâpati, watch over
11 agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacrifice, and was the gods' preceder.
vatsapri bhalandana win the home dear to agni; verily by it he wins the home dear to agni. it has
mixed with honey; verily he makes him ready; curds is a food of the village, honey of the wild; in that
l of the seasons spring i delight; delighted may it delight me.
6 he is the lord of both these armies' valour when the commanders call them to the conflict:
to the chariot he made obeisance, to the horses he made obeisance; as the chariot with the horses (made
be none there, then it should be pointed out by the grhapati. at any rate it should be pointed out. they
19 hawk seated in the bowls, bird wide-extended, the banner seeking kine and wielding weapons,
he desire of a man, 'may he be a ruler', he should think of him with his mind; verily he becomes a ruler
2 may he the immortal, helper, bard to be deceived among mankind,
when the most liberal god, for paktha, rescued his parents, and assailed the seven hotras.
dhâtar (the creator) supports (didhhra) this earth, dhâtar supports the heavens, and the sun. may dhatar
may this rich indra, as our good protector, drive off and keep afar all those who hate us.
clinging to the ground thou didst grow, (o plant), that producest bliss for me; a hundred branches extend from
remover of the woe that gods have sent us? o strong one, look thou on me with compassion.
sprung in the north from the himavant (mountains), thou art brought to the people in the east. there the most
that this more glorious fuel may send forth for thee its shine to heaven. bring food to those who sing
make both worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the clouds: mete out exhaustless powers for us, as
with whom our friendship is most famed, and kinship passing that of gods.
drink, heavenly-natured. at our sacrifices, and give us bounties for the hymns we sing you.
not shut together!--born of indra, born of soma, thou, (my charm), art atharvan's crusher of tigers.
bathing is fated to drown; (the son born) of one who anoints herself has a skin disease; (the son born)
5 forth darts the bull's tongue like the sharp stone weapon discharged by him who fights to win the
4 agni vaisvanara, both earth and heaven submit them to thy threefold jurisdiction.
4 who, agni, in alliance with thy foeman, what splendid helpers won for them their riches?
p o thou of various splendour, in safety may i reach the end of thee.
altar) with five (verses); the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he goes to the world of heaven with the full
e thou art the fetter of the strong steed; for rain i yoke thee.
the son of conquest, passing men and heroes, kinewinner, mount thy conquering car, o indra!
10 in pride of beauty like a maid thou goest, o goddess, to the god who longs to win thee,
that asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. the ships of truth have borne the pious man
him . the oblations of him whose realm is not in order are disordered; he should take off the right
in the human form, we tend to forget our origin and eternal form. we regard ourselves as the physical body and get attracted to our bodily relations; parents, spouse, children, material wealth, etc. we feel they are the most significant. we also forget that it is god who is the creator and sustainer of the entire universe.in this verse, lord shree krishna has said that the entire creation; is the manifestation of his energy. even the sun gets its radiance from him. according to scientific theories, the energy emittedevery second by the sun is equivalent to millions of nuclear power plants put together, and ithas been an uninterrupted process for billions of years. yet this energy has not reduced in any way. the glory and brilliance of the sun area part of god’s wonderful creation.similarly, the night sky is litup by the moon. though our mundane intellect might want us to believe and it is also scientifically concluded that moonshine is due to the reflection of the sun’s light. but the periodic movement of the moon is also part of god’s amazing creation. the sun, the moon, the planets, stars, the panch mahabhootas (earth, water, air, fire, and ether); in fact, the entire universe is a manifestation of god’s vibhūtis (opulence). it would be very naïve to think that such an amazing celestial arrangement is a result of some random big bang.there is a story in kenopanishad, which explicates this. once there was a prolonged war between the devatās (celestial gods) and the daityas (demons from the nether regions). eventually, the devatās won by the grace of god. but their pride made them think that it was due to their own strength. god wanted to teach them a lesson; he manifested as an effulgent and powerful yakṣha (a semi-celestial being) in the celestial sky.when indra, the king of heaven saw this yakṣha, he felt insecure and intimidated. to find out who this yakṣhawas, he sent agni, the fire god. with great pride,agni challenged the yakṣha and said, “i am the fire god, and possess the power to burn the entire world within seconds, please reveal yourself.” the yakṣha put in front of him a piece of straw and asked if he could burn it. agni laughed, “can a blade of grass be a test for my immense power? let that be.” but when he moved forward to burn it, he could not and started feeling very cold himself. god had taken away his power, defeated and embarrassed he ran back to indra.next, indra sent vayu, the wind god to inquire who this yakṣha was. he went to the yakṣha and said, “i am the wind god and possess the power to turn the world upside down within a few seconds, reveal who you are?” again, the yakṣha put a piece of straw in front of vayu and said, “turn this over if you can?” vayu smirked with pride and tried to blow it, but could not. he felt powerless, and with great effort, he returned to indra exhausted.now indra was raged and came to challenge theyakṣhahimself. but by then theyakṣhahad disappeared and in his place was seated goddess uma, god’s divineyogmayapower. a baffled indra asked her, “o divine mother, please tell me who was that powerfulyakṣha?” she answered, “o imprudent child, you could not recognize him? your pride had blinded your prudence. he was your supreme father, your creator, and power source, without him you would be powerless.” realizing his mistake, indra begged for forgiveness.
the mouth of the sacrifice, and sacrifices with the second. verily one wins the gods with the first, power
a black cow with a white calf; verily by the day he bestows night upon him, by night day; verily day and
2 the son of strength; for is he not our gracious lord? let us serve him who bears our gifts.
having piled up a fire does not display splendour; in that he puts down the aditya bricks, yonder sun
knowing eternal law, the earliest light of heaven, he, passing wise, was chosen out to tell it forth.
for expiration, for cross-breathing, for inspiration; for speech thee; for sight thee; with that deity, in the
here, o ye rbhus, is this sea for all the gods: sate you with soma offered with the hallowing word.
48 now, chariot-borne, flow unto us, god soma, as thou art purified flow to the saucers,
16 give us not up to those who, foes in ambuscade, are greedy for the wealth of him who sits at ease,
interest. 'with pusan as fellow', he says; pusan is the leader together of roads; (verily it serves) for
6 the vrtra-slaver with his bolt felled vrtra: the magic of the godless, waxen mighty,
5 with holy thoughts the pious have thrown open doors fain for chariots in the gods' assembly.
o heavenly priest, most pleasant, full of wisdom, bring the great gods to us, and earth and heaven.
sacrifices, desirous of cattle, with (the offering) of three constituents, creates cattle from the very source
they win power and strength at the end of the sacrifice. they sing the sattra syarddhi (saman) at the end
4 yea,indra, with the men, through love of gloryconsumes the sacred food which friends have offered.
what sloth is this? why dost thou not rejoice thee? why dost thou not delight thyself with giving?
to thy limbs, to thy belly, to thy tongue, to thy mouth, to thy teeth, to thy smell (nose), reverence be!
he who rules over this (all) derived from every source, and over everything that movesreverence be to thee, o
the honey that is in the mountains, in the heights; in the cows, and in the horses; the honey which is in the
the gods have come that they may taste the oblation of him who mounted, first of all, the courser.
dispel the darkness and fill full our vision deliver us as men whom snares entangle.
for thee the wild beasts of the forest have been placed in the forest: flamingoes, eagles, birds of prey, and
drives away the raksases from agni when born. he puts on one of açvattha wood; of trees the açvattha
4 flow hitherward, o indu, sweet to indra and to visnu: guard
rodasl stood among these furious heroes like splendour shining with her native brightness.
longevity, freedom from foes, fearlessness, ease of going, lying, fair dawning, and fair day (prosper
i. this day with praises, agni, we bring thee that which thou lovest.
3 unlike in form are the red god's two daughters: one is the sun's, and stars bedeck the other.
22 the, tree whereon the fine birds eat the sweetness, where they all rest and procreate their
i know that all this behavior is sinful. god! let this water wash away from me this sinful behavior.
and the grass put within his mouth to bait him,-among the gods, too, let all these be with thee.
3 these are, each one, our present helps, varuna, mitra, aryaman.
many colours. (therefore), when a cow doth beget twins portentously, growling and cross she injureth the cattle.
effused, the source of indra's joy: may your strong juices reach the gods!
ye cows, protect the fount: the two mighty ones bless the sacrifice.
14 and, irresistible, be thou a mighty iron fort to us,
knowing the two milkings of the sacrifice milks thus the sacrifice on both sides , in front and behind;
12 dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, yama's two envoys roam among the people;
4 among the skilful gods most skilled is he, who made the two world-halves which bring prosperity to
7 so agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou mitra, varuna, and indra.
2 o agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou passing-wise who knowest every ordinance.
theologians say, 'one should offer curds first, for curds is made first' . one should disregard that and
verily he places the breaths in the head of the sacrifice; therefore seven are the breaths in the head. he
2 he who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggered, and set at rest the agitated mountains,
come, indra, with thy dear bay horses harnessed, come to our dwelling and the food thou lovest.
2 o agni, thou, the best and earliest angiras, fulfillest as a sage the holy law of gods.
were in conflict, they deposited their desirable wealth; the gods appropriated it by means of the
sing praise to him the lord of light! the gods have made the god to be their messenger,
sweets from your sweet shall drop, lovers of sweetness! these have they dressed for you as dainty
agni and visnu he appropriates the gods and the sacrifice of his enemy, his pairing cattle with (the
is a dwarf beast of burden. to agni and soma he offers on eleven potsherds, to indra and soma on
13 may this god savitar, the lord, the offspring of waters, pouring down his dew be gracious,
schemes, then did the asvins, the physicians of the gods, with might sweep death from us, o agni!
2 o maruts, rich in water, strengtheners of life are your strong bands with harnessed steeds, that
to the saman he made obeisance, to the rc he made obeisance; as the saman with the rc (made
who, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as, twere a mother cow.
5 baffle the foeman's plan, ward off his weapon who would conquer us.
the mother was above, the son was under and like a cow beside her calf lay danu.
c let the god savitr impel you to the most excellent offering.
20 what time the swift one resteth in the golden place of sacrifice,
(seizure) has caught hold (gagrâha) of this person here, may indra and agni free him from that!
eleven potsherds; to mitra and varuna, saviours from sin, a milk offering; to vayu and savitr saviours
34 before them sink the very hills deerning themseives abysses: yea,
all these our deeds the singer hath considered. let nirrti depart to distant places.
32 with splendour, riches, and renown, o asvins, hither come to us,
b thou art taken with a support; to the god savity thee
pressing. the asuras sought to follow their sacrifice, but could not get on its tracks. they said, 'these
o indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, satakratu, thou most active, bring
30 nearest and most attractive may our laud, o indra come to thee.
whom, served with sacrificial oil, like mitra, men presenting gifts,
c thou art the stepping of visnu, thou art the step of visnu, thou art the stride of visnu
3 soma and pusan, urge your chariot hither, the seven-wheeied car that measures out the region,
3 or may our indra here, the friend of all mankind, coming from heaven, most.wise, girt by the marut
they never violate the laws of indra. present the oil-rich offering to the rivers.
4 as thou, o satakratu, thou, o indrv, shakest all things down
pramlocanti and anumlocanti his apsarases, his missile the serpents, his weapon tigers.
holy order is this (earth); verily he conquers this (earth). 'thee for the might of holy order', he says; the
may i be sweeter than honey; sweeter then liquorice. may you long for me – as a honeybee longs for a flower
calling the heavenly priest to share the banquet, who rends the wood, bright, with his blackened
be near us, keep us from reproach and trouble. father and mother, with your help preserve us.
13 praised through my prayer be ye who should be lauded. ye have increased our wealth, ye dawns
.1 sukta 1 – prayer for exemption from the dangers of death
w from the depth with the top he meted with measures,
2 strong are the soma-draughts; come nigh: the juices fill thee with delight:
as the sun is resplendent, as in him brilliance has been deposited, thus shall the amulet of varana hold fast for
the dragon lies beneath the feet of torrents which vrtra with his greatness had encompassed.
'may it not rain', he should rub with the hand upwards; verily he keeps up the rain. if he practise
put forth like a wide-spreading net thy vigour; go like a mighty king with his attendants.
the press-stones chew and crunch thee on the ox's hide: sages have milked thee with their hands into
thou art, bright juice, sustainer of the sky: flow, mighty, in accordance with true law!
o agni, to a great heroic deed thou wast aroused, to cook the brahman's porridge, o gâtavedas! the seven
the strong youths have come forth to view, to show their strength, god savitar's quickening energy:
6 when, indra, thou dost yoke thy steeds, there is no better charioteer:
the willing bulls, untouched by old, rejoice them: as gods themselves the ways of gods they follow.
4 when thrice the men lead round the steed, in order, who goeth to the gods as meet oblation,
.8 sukta 8 – charm to procure immunity from all diseases
god’s personality includes his various energies. all manifest and unmanifest objects are but expansions of his energy. thus, we can say he is all that exists. accordingly, shreemad bhagavatam states:dravyaṁ karma cha kālaśh cha svabhāvo jīva eva chavāsudevāt paro brahman na chānyo ’rtho ’sti tattvataḥ (2.5.14)“the various aspects of creation—time, karma, the natures of individual living beings, and the material ingredients of creation—are all the supreme lord shree krishna himself. there is nothing in existence apart from him.”god may appear to be divided amongst the objects of his creation, but since he is all that exists, he remains undivided as well. for example, space may seem to be divided amongst the objects that it contains. yet, all objects are within the one entity called space, which manifested at the beginning of creation. again, the reflection of the sun in puddles of water appears divided, and yet the sun remains indivisible.just as the ocean throws up waves and then absorbs them back into itself, similarly god creates the world, maintains it, and then absorbs it back into himself. therefore, he may be equally seen as the creator, the maintainer, and the destroyer of everything.
by the yajya and the anuvakya, i summon for thee, o offering.
3 i laud the ruddy steeds who pour down blessing, dropping oil, flectest through the thoualit of order.
(with them) those that last double the time; the sixteenfold stotra (shodasin), and the soma-sacrifice that lasts
11 by law the angirases cleft the rock asunder, and sang their hymns together with the cattle.
3 o agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine:
full of nurture, full of milk, fixed upon the earth, erected, holding food for all, o house, do thou not injure them
soma and pusan, aid my thought with favour: with you may we o'ercome in all encounters.
27 delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great munificence:
vouchsafe us high renown, o jatavedas, and may i be immortal by my children.
high is thy juice's birth: though set it heaven, on earth it hath obtained dread sheltering power and great
winners of wealth, we call, and wise brhaspati, destroyer of our foes, and soma indra's friend.
indra, having been wounded, first created this vigour, and this ever fresh divine food: that same belongs to
4 he, beautified by pious men, and coming from their hands adorned,
3 travelling on the paths of air's midregion, no single day doth he take rest or slumber.
counting its dead by thousands, the hostile army, pierced and shattered in the clash of arms, shall lie!
q that is thine, o father, and those that are after thee. that is thine, o grandfather, o great-grandfather,
3 as such, like angiras we call on thee best winner of the spoil:
butter, he takes again cattle for him. the speckled butter is the breath; his breath falls, if his speckled
5 when through the filter thou art poured, we clothe thee with a robe of milk
7 here is the seat where yama dwells, that which is called the home of gods:
hero, the soma being shed, i pour the juice for thee to drink
7 like women, let this soma-draught, invested with its robe, approach,
syllables; the other three are of eight syllables. the three approach the eight; the four the eight. because
6 let your swift-gliding coursers bear you hitherward with their fleet pinions. come ye forward with your
shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, casting his weapons forth and dealing bounties.
to thee the weary coward prays for luck that he may speed away.
4 when, mighty rudras, through the nights and through the days, when through the sky and realms of
1 as a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of fair deeds,
chariot is the last: it shall hit a post, and come to grief!
11 come hither with thine car inclined to hear, take pleasure in our lauds.
as such assail our enemies, vadhryasva, whether the foes be strangers or be kinsmen.
12 like some rich lord of men may he, agni the banner of the gods,
drink of the pleasant liquor of the soma give riches to the people who adore you.
3 sharp-pointed, powerful, strong, of boundless vigour, agni who knows the lofty hymn, kept secret
therefore pusan has pounded food for his share, for he has no teeth. the gods said of him, 'he has lost
let us, if we have power, pay the god worship: no better prayer than this, ye gods, acknowledge.
decking thee like a horse, the swift prizewinner. may he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
served with oblation, kindled, bright, through love of song, may agni, bent
the asvattha-tree is the seat of the gods in the third heaven from here. there came to sight the amrita
offspring to viçvakarman he was set free from evil; in that he offers a libation to agni of the front, agni
3 he knows, a god himself, to guide gods to the righteous in his home:
f thou art the path of vayu; thou art the gods' path of vayu.
friendly be they, the liberal ones who seek us, yea, those who dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters.
for him the cow, noble and far-extending, poured pleasant juices, bringing oil and sweetness.
9 come, o nasatyas, on your car decked with a sunbright canopy,
mitra and varuna were the inviters: agni as hota; took her hand and led her.
6 true are all these thy deeds, o most heroic. the milch-kine issued from the streaming udder.
b thou art the thunderbolt of indra, slaying obstructions, with thee may this one smite vrtra.
four directions has the heaven, and also four the earth: (from these) the gods created the embryo. may they
may the great ones, the çakvari (verses), with favouring winds
ruling', (with these words) he puts down on the east; 'thou art the prop ruling', (with these words) he
him in whose keeping is the well-loved singer never do gods or mortals stay or hinder.
4 what was spread out she weaves afresh, re-weaving: the skilful leaves his labour half-completed.
auspicious is your gift like a free giver's meed, victorious, spreading far, as of immortal gods.
d the drop, the shoot, that hath fallen on the ground,
6 for indra thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk and meath,
vasistha, his sons slain, desired, 'may i win offspring, and defeat the sauddsas.' he saw this (rite) of
k with eyes on every side, with a face on every side,
4 ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong in your splendour and like kings for conquest;
may we see turvasa and yadu! thy great deed, o hero, must be glorified.
what time thou, indra, with thy spiky weapon, thy deadly bolt, smotest the face of vrtra.
wide is his dwelling. may the noble offipring of nahusa who wandered forth come hither.
may he, well skilled in rites, be food, and calling aditi with his lips give us assistance.
over all worlds let agni be the sovran, the messenger of gods with rapid coursers.
which attend him as he performs the vow. headed by visnu the gods won these worlds by the metres so
arjun has rejoiced upon hearing shree krishna’s vibhūtis, as well as knowledge about the supreme personality, and he feels that his illusion is now dispelled. he has accepted that shree krishna is not merely his best friend, but also the supreme divine personality, who is the source of all opulence in the world. now in this chapter, he begins by gratefully acknowledging shree krishna’s compassion in revealing such invaluable knowledge.
oblation-holder over the skin, sacrifice in the ahavaniya, retire towards the west, and consume (the
2 the ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like rival wives.
whom the angirases produced by fervour,vouchsafe to these, parjanya, great protection.
whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of heaven,
5 we laud and praise his several deeds of valour who, fatherlike, with power hath made us stronger;
vow extends not beyond the year; verily his own deity, being sacrificed to, kindles him with
the takman that returns on each third day, the one that cominues without intermission, and the yearly one, ao
indra raised his bolt, aided by visnu. he said, 'hurl it not at me; there is this strength in me; i will
ahungered, one should sacrifice with (the rite) of nine nights, for these worlds are not fitted for them,
9 by worship, pavamana! men have strengthened thee to prop the law:
the streams of milk move, as most wondrous sunlight, the beauty of the lovely one for glory.
15 two brown-hued steeds, indrota's gift, two bays from rksa's son were mine,
4 he who with succour comes to his implorer, the singer here who with his song invites him;
bring meed, as 'twere, to one who makes thee glad with hymns.
some creatures find support, in flesh others. the asuras from above desired to turn round the earth; the
2 the bowl made indra swift to gather booty, the high, the lofty, youthful, undecaying,
here, ye waters, is your heart, here is your calf, ye righteous ones! come ye, mighty ones, by this way here, by
2 thou wanderest far, o indra, through the spheres of light and realms of earth, the region, thou whom
d he puts down golden bricks; gold is light; verily be confers light upon him; again gold is brilliance;
all the elements of nature are integral parts of the system of god’s creation. all the parts of the system naturally draw from and give back to the whole. the sun lends stability to the earth and provides heat and light necessary for life to exist. earth creates food from its soil for our nourishment and also holds essential minerals in its womb for a civilized lifestyle. the air moves the life force in our body and enables transmission of sound energy. we humans too are an integral part of the entire system of god’s creation. the air that we breathe, the earth that we walk upon, the water that we drink, and the light that illumines our day, are all gifts of creation to us. while we partake of these gifts to sustain our lives, we also have our duties toward the integral system. shree krishna says that we are obligated to participate with the creative force of nature by performing our prescribed duties in the service of god. that is the yajña he expects from us.consider the example of a hand. it is an integral part of the body. it receives its nourishment—blood, oxygen, nutrients, etc.—from the body, and in turn, it performs necessary functions for the body. if the hand looks on this service as burdensome, and decides to get severed from the body, it cannot sustain itself for even a few minutes. it is in the performance of its yajña toward the body that the self-interest of the hand is also fulfilled. similarly, we individual souls are tiny parts of the supreme soul and we all have our role to play in the grand scheme of things. when we perform our yajña toward him, our self-interest is naturally satiated.generally, the term yajña refers to fire sacrifice. in the bhagavad gita, yajña includes all the prescribed actions laid down in the scriptures, when they are done as an offering to the supreme.
food noble, plenteous, far from sin and evil, he with us, and fair fame to make us happy.
bow lowly down; be easy to be traversed stay, rivers, with your floods below our axles.
6 thou with thy might didst grasp,the holder-up of heaven, thou who art mighty also in the seats of
may you ride the imperishable chariot of happiness. may you grow in wisdom with the years.
12 to vayu joined with pusan, with the maruts, and the host of gods,
sacrificer is the divine tvastr. he pays reverence with many (verses); verily he makes many
let thy bay steeds, thy stallions, hasten hither, with whom thou cornest nigh and art delighted.
thy opponents shall call thee; thy friends have chosen. thee! indra, agni, and all the gods have kept prosperity
thou, indra, knowing, thinking, lord of tawny steeds, above all glories waxest great.
in battle of a thousand arms indra drank kadru's soma juice
sweet with the liquor of the stalk, as one who wakes, into the vat that drops with meath.
o gâtavedas (agni), cause thou to turn ill; a hundred way's hither shall be thine, a thousand modes of return
hurt thou another and not us, o thunderarmed, one who would hurt, o thunder-armed!
the golden-hued is poured forth, with his hundred streams, wealth-bringer, lifting up his voice while
be gone, he yet lives. the hotr loosens him that is swallowed by soma and rudra and he is liable to be
these soma juices shall pour forth all treasures for the worshipper,
incline thy body to the juice which suits thy godlike nature well:
victor with vayu where the herds are gathered, who leads with boldness on to higher fortune.
rich in sweetness, full of strength, caring for the royal consecration;
longing, they turned their eyes unto the river: to these the sun of men was manifested.
meditation requires the dual process of removing the mind from the world and fixing it on god. here, shree krishna begins by describing the first part of the process—taking the mind away from the world. thoughts of worldly things, people, events, etc. come to the mind when it is attached to the world. initially, the thoughts are in the form of sphurṇā (flashes of feelings and ideas). when we insist on the implementation of sphurṇā, it becomes saṅkalp. thus, thoughts lead to saṅkalp (pursuit of these objects) and vikalp (revulsion from them), depending upon whether the attachment is positive or negative. the seed of pursuit and revulsion grows into the plant of desire, “this should happen. this should not happen.” both saṅkalp and vikalp immediately create impressions on the mind, like the film of a camera exposed to the light. thus, they directly impede meditation upon god. they also have a natural tendency to flare up, and a desire that is a seed today can become an inferno tomorrow. thus, one who desires success in meditation should renounce the affinity for material objects. having described the first part of the process of meditation—removing the mind from the world—shree krishna then talks of the second part. the mind should be made to reside upon god. he says this will not happen automatically, but with determined effort, success will come slowly. determination of resolve that is in accordance with the scriptures is called dhṛiti. this determination comes with conviction of the intellect. many people acquire academic knowledge of the scriptures about the nature of the self and the futility of worldly pursuits. but their daily life is at variance with their knowledge, and they are seen to indulge in sin, sex, and intoxication. this happens because their intellect is not convinced about that knowledge. the power of discrimination comes with the conviction of the intellect about the impermanence of the world and the eternality of one’s relationship with god. thus utilizing the intellect, one must gradually cease sensual indulgence. this is called pratyāhār, or control of the mind and senses from running toward the objects of the senses. success in pratyāhār will not come immediately. it will be achieved through gradual and repeated exercise. shree krishna explains next what that exercise involves.
soma flows on obtaining indra's friendly love, and, as they purify him, settles in the jars.
on these two paths each moving creature travels, each thing between the father and the mother.
which rodasi hath mounted, bringing pleasant gifts, with maruts in her company.
3 when war and battles are on foot, booty is laid before the bold.
the metres that are heavenly. by the sacrifice prajapati created creatures; he created them by the
this (earth) they praise, whatever they have praised, through that is this (earth) the serpent queen. now
4 that indra may be bounteous, flow, most active soma, for our weal:
would it go ill; if he were to make a success, for both would it go well; he draws without breathing; this
as administrators of various processes of the universe, the devatās provide us with rain, wind, crops, vegetation, minerals, fertile soil, etc. we human beings are indebted to them for all that we receive from them. the devatās perform their duty, and expect us to perform our duty in the proper consciousness too. since these celestial gods are all servants of the supreme lord, they become pleased when someone performs a sacrifice for him, and in turn assist such a soul by creating favorable material conditions. thus, it is said that when we strongly resolve to serve god, the universe begins to cooperate with us.however, if we begin looking upon the gifts of nature, not as means of serving the lord but as objects of our own enjoyment, shree krishna calls it a thieving mentality. often people ask the question, “i lead a virtuous life; i do not harm anyone, nor do i steal anything. but i do not believe in worshipping god, nor do i believe in him. am i doing anything wrong?” this question is answered in the above verse. such persons may not be doing anything wrong in the eyes of humans, but they are thieves in the eyes of god. let us say, we walk into someone’s house, and without recognizing the owner, we sit on the sofa, eat from the refrigerator, and use the restroom. we may claim that we are not doing anything wrong, but we will be considered thieves in the eyes of the law, because the house does not belong to us. similarly, the world that we live in was made by god, and everything in it belongs to him. if we utilize his creation for our pleasure, without acknowledging his dominion over it, from the divine perspective we are certainly committing theft.the famous king in indian history, chandragupta, asked chanakya pundit, his guru, “according to the vedic scriptures, what is the position of the king vis-à-vis his subjects?” chanakya pundit replied, “the king is the servant of the subjects and nothing else. his god-given duty is to help the citizens of his kingdom progress in their journey toward god-realization.” whether one is a king, a businessperson, a farmer, or a worker, each person, as an integral member of god’s world, is expected to do his or her duty as a service to the supreme.
cows; they, milking desires, wait upon him yonder in yonder world.
he shall bring both these great worlds while the rite proceeds: the sage holds these who move!
6 indra begirt by maruts we invoke after the ancient plan,
the waters and the plants, promote the songs we sing: come bhaga, rati, and the vaijns to my call.
a thou, o agni, art rudra, the asura of the mighty sky,
7 agni, with thee, soliciting thy favour, the holy ones have gained glory in heaven.
g o lord of the world, thou who hast houses above and here, do thou give us increase of wealth,
thou, indra, laying the great mountain open, slaying the danava, didst loose the torrents.
3 agni! the hero slays with might his foeman; the singer bears away the pani's bootyeven he whom thou, sage, born in law, incitest by wealth, accordant with the child of waters.
9 thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, thy forceful shares of holy presents.
.76 sukta 76 – charm for curing scrofulous sores called apakit
2 his two red horses, all-supporting, let him yoke: let him, well-worshipped, urge them fast.
the daksina's broad chariot hath been harnessed: this car the gods immortal have ascended.
6 drive thou away the dasyu with thy weapon. as, gaining vital power for thine own body,
w i implore this of thee, praising thee with my hymn;
.9 sukta 9 – prayer to arbudi and nyarbudi for help in battle
5 sitting like birds beside thy meath., mingled with milk, that gladdeneth and exalteth thee,
let not my thread, while i weave song, be severed, nor my work's sum, before the time, be shattered.
7 o agni, as thou burnest down to earth even high-grown underwood,
becomes rich in cattle. 'for what good is the fire piled?' they say. 'may the seven men live upon me',
for six days, thereby they created three hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne for six
to us, and carry the offering for us.' he said, 'let me choose a boon; whatever of the offering when it is
serves) for conquest. in that he keeps the fire in the pan for a year, he saves this world by it; in that
3 the dappled kine who stream with milk prepare his draught of soma juice:
6 in thee, o food, is set the spirit of great gods.
agrayana libation, he should draw off silently; those after with noise; verily he bestows upon the gods
3 hither hath surya's daughter brought the wild steer whom parjanya nursed.
21 this is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the lofty misty realm of surya.
or with your godlike natures stand upon your cars, come thence, o asvins, hitherward.
6 exceeding strong in war he stays the chariot wheel, and, hating him who pours not, prospers him who
he smote away the obstructors with his thunder, and eager for their course forth flowed the waters.
13 come, thou most potent indra, come to drink the savoury soma juice.
3 these deeds he did; let him achieve new exploits, such as the priests declare at their libations.
he should breathe across; verily he unites cross-breathing with cross-breathing; having put down the
23 o presser, offer soma first to indra, hero, sakra, him
5 indra with rush and might, sped by his coursers, hath swiftly won the waters from the southward.
better the speaking than the silent brahman: the liberal friend outyalues him who gives not.
strew the upper strew. the strew is the people; the upper strew is the sacrificer; verily he makes the
have to be piled up again. 'with thy body, o agni, worthy of sacrifice, come hither and mount', (with
n be ye of one mind for us, one dwelling, spotless.
gladden the gods, gladden the host of maruts: make heaven and earth rejoice, o god, o soma!
sixteenfold is force; verily he places force on the north; therefore he that advances to the north is
to these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye praise, to these who bear ten car-poles, ten when they
10 she who flashed brilliant as the falling lightning brought me delicious presents from the waters.
there is a caturvinça. twenty-four half-months make up the year, the year is the world of heaven;
wise singers glorify with chanted praises these his achievements in vivasvan's dwelling.
light is yonder sun; verily he attains unity with the sun. the year lags not, his future fails not, for whom
that earth upon which the attendant waters jointly flow by day and night unceasingly, shall pour out milk for us
2 what time the rbus had with care and marvels done proper service to assist their parents,
verily he calms the pain of the whole extent of the fire. (he draws) with (verses) containing (the word)
holding aloft the radiant lights of surya, as messenger of heaven he shines with treasures.
who practises witchcraft they practise then against; he should double each of the puronuvakyas, for
verily thereby he yokes it for strength. he gathers with the ass; therefore the ass is the best burdengatherer of animals. he gathers with the ass; therefore the ass, even when grazing is bad, becomes fat
2 thee, as thou art, desiring wealth gotama worships with his song:
verily he makes the oblation, and then he proceeds in order. the fore-sacrifices are the father, the aftersacrifices the son; in that having offered the fore-sacrifices he sprinkles the oblations, the father makes
4 among all fires these fires have shone most brightly, splendid with light, begirt by noble heroes,
like the sun's glance, like wealth of varied sort, like breath which is the life, like one's own son,
5 the mighty roaring flood he stayed from flowing, and carried those who swam not safely over.
puts the bundle over the sacrificial strew, the strew is offspring, the bundle the sacrificer; verily he
be gracious to us, soma, driving off distress! thou goest, clothed in butter, to a robe of state.
4 asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused,
5 when with wise plan the hero leads the people forth, they conquer in the ordered battle, seeking
(havis) with a rc; by that means he supports those with incisors on both sides. the puronuvakya
the earth hath spread herself in all her fulness: the cloud that was about to move hath rested.
16 princes, who, when i asked their kin, named prsni as their mother-cow,
8 ye gave a ain the vigour of his youthful life to tge sage kali when old age was coming nigh.
the fit word have i caught and held as 'twere a courser with the rein.
let me not utter words that ye may disregard. closely allied with you may we rejoice in bliss.
give to thy praisers: let not fortune fail us. loud may we speak, with brave men, in assembly.
thinking, 'i have sinned.' the gods sought to start him. prajapati said, i he who first finds him will have
god’s laws are excellent and eternal. no one can break or disobey them – neither the conniving
unite your person with that of your husband and continue to rule over the household all your life.
7 men, agni, have established thee as welcome priest at holy rites,
should contain the word 'strong (vrsan)'; verily he takes indra away from their morning pressing. or
4 winner of thousands, he, this soma, flows along, raising a vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn.
o bowstring, turn aside from us, turn my body into stone! do thou firmly hold very far away the hostile powers
deity; verily he approaches it with its own deity. 'i have passed by others, i have not approached others',
superior to another prince. now agni is death, gold is immortality; he puts a gold plate within; verily he
3 invoked of many, caster of the stone my heart quakes like a rolling wheel for fear of penury.
naturally perforated bricks are these worlds; with these exclamations prajapati was propagated; in that
7 come with the early-faring gods, ye who are lords of genuine wealth:
sacrifice comes to ruin; as the sacrifice comes to ruin the sacrificer comes to ruin along with it; in that he
hence conquering with might when car meets car, and when the prize is staked,
4 when, clothed in manly strength, the sage flows in celestial wisdom round,
adityas thee! quicken the adityas. thou art force; for the pitrs thee! quicken the pitrs. thou art the
excrements from his head, who accepts (a present) at the twelve-day (rite). therefore one should not
flow forth, o soma, flow thou onward, sweet to indra's,
o agni, guard the spots which cattle love: thou, life of all, hast gone from lair to lair.
4 indu arouses strength the sage who strives for victory, winning power,
is the abode of (the cup) for indra and vayu, the agrayana is drawn on this (day); therefore (the cup) for
one world after another of men. they first use the jagati, and the metres descend from the jagati, the
they lead, as 'twere, the strong horse forth, that it may rain: they milk the thundering, the never-failing
banyan trees, by the udumbara strength, by the gayatri the metres, by the trivrt the stomas, by the
f thou art the strainer of the vasus, of a hundred streams, thou art that of the vasus, of a thousand
may all evil go away from me, and mav possessions come to me!
heart; may they love me with their hearts; make them of one mind with me; hail! thou art affection;
like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himself, the way.
9 agni, thine home is in the floods: into the plants thou forcest way,
oblation to the vrtra slayer; they slay him at the full moon , but make him swell at the new moon;
past; in that he measures in silence, the future. now if there were only so much soma as that which he
3 like babes in arms reposing on their mother, let the gods sit upon the grass's summit.
3 call hither with thy newest song indra who lacks not hymns of praise,
7 fierce (asvins), like two powerful (heroes), you enable this moving, perishable mortal (frame) to cross
. let us not be overcome by that.' he replied, 'from pruning shall more (shoots) spring up for you.'
3 when the sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a car visiting all worlds, the hero,
shall know them thus'. it is the year which repels from support him who having piled up the fire does not
o satakratu indra, now rejoice with that carouse of thine
gift of thine, o agni , cometh, impelled by the soma', he says, for his gift comes impelled by the
2 o lord of strength, whose jaws are strong, great deeds are thine, the powerful:
lord of the path, o pusan, we have yoked and bound thee to our hymn,
by revealing the locations where lust resides, shree krishna now indicates that there is a method of controlling it. the fortress of the enemy must be spotted before one can lay siege on it. in this verse, shree krishna states that the senses, mind, and intellect are the places from where lust exercises its dominion over the soul. under the sway of lust, the sense objects are desired by the senses, the senses infatuate the mind, the mind misleads the intellect, and the intellect loses its discriminatory powers. when the intellect is clouded, the living being is deluded to become a slave of lust and will do anything to satiate it.these instruments—senses, mind, and intellect—are not bad in themselves. they were given to us for the purpose of achieving god-realization, but we have permitted lust in its many forms to lay siege on them. now, we have to use the same senses, mind, and intellect to uplift ourselves. in the following verses, shree krishna explains how to do that.
7 when i and indra mount on high up to the bright one's place and home,
on the first day the saman is that of vikhanas; verily he does not leave the jagati. on the second it is the
as thou art great indeed, thy greatness is admired: yea, verily, thou, god, art great.
pan) deficient in size ; if he desire of a man, 'may he eat food that fails not', he should put it down
5 sage agni, be whom thou dost urge, in worship of the gods, to wealth,
b to indra, slayer of vrtra, thee! to indra, conqueror of vrtra, thee! to indra, slayer of foes, thee! to
as such, o wonderful, whose hand holds thunder, praised as mighty, caster of the stone!
not one of you, ye gods, is small, none of you is a feeble child:
by it they are propagated. there is an ekavinça, for support; verily they place radiance in themselves.
9 take up in beakers what remains: the soma on the filter pour,
into a sorry state.' he replied, 'so shall i act that it will not burn thee excessively.' he stroked it, (saying),
18 my kine, o radiant god, seek pasture where they will, my during wealth, immortal one.
verily the sacrificer delights the gods who eat and those who do not eat the offerings; they delight the
4 compassing those who bore away dabhiti, in kindled fire he burnt up all their weapons.
from the two fire-sticks have the men engendered, with thought, urged by the hand, the glorious
16 do ye, destroyers of the foe, worshipful and exceeding bright,
eager and prompt at will, wherewith thou crushedst the boasting dragon, o impetuous hero.
who with a bounteous guerdon welcomes hymns of praise: for him flows down the abundant stream
3 with splendour, agni, son of strength, thou who art worshipped, wakeful one.
2 this, dealt from heaven ' may both the worlds vouchsafe us, and varuna, indra, aryaman, and mitra.
prajapati desired, 'may i create offspring.' he did penance, he created serpents. he desired, 'may i create
he that has fitted together thy joints with skill, as the wagoner (ribhu) the joints of a chariot, to him go, there is
when through the forest, urged by wind, he spreads, verily agni shears the hair of earth.
3 dear. to all gods, this goat, the share of pusan, is first led forward with the vigorous courser,
8 may the two priests divine, the sage, the sweet-voiced lovers of the hymn,
4 for you these juices are poured forth that gladden and exhilarate,
viraj is this (cow), the skin is its hide, the pressing-boards its udder, the sounding-holes its teats, the
with power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the bay coursers bear him on as surya.
to thee (that growest) upon the mountain, the brooding-place of the eagle, (and) art sprung from himavant,
i worship you who guard this all, gods, holiest among the gods,
favour and health and strength bestow upon my son; triple protection, lords of splendour, grant to
(verses) containing the words agni and pu; verily he renews it and makes it unageing, and also purifies
produced separately. the omentum is the chief part of cattle, the strew the chief of plants; verily he
of heaven; declare this brahmana to them; when they go to the, world of heaven they will give thee their
strewn is the sacred grass; come vayu, to our feast, with team of thousands, come, lord of the
as he who with oblation comes calls him aloud in every place.
20 agni, disposer, we have sung these praises to thee the wise: do thou accept them gladly.
of his equals. 'ye gods that are eleven in the sky', he says ; so many are the deities; verily he draws it
harness thy pair of strong bay steeds, long-maned, whose bodies fill the girths.
thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like showers of rain from heaven,
whate'er, in this perpetual course, we sacrifice to god and god,
o indra, thou art far-renowned, impetuous lord of power and might.
indra is lord of prosperers and sages indra must be invoked in rest and effort.
measured with measures, fixed their broad expanses, set the great worlds apart held firm for safety.
9 fed with our fuel, purifying agni, so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream in due succession through the ample fleece.
may we be winners of abundant riches. may indra be our wealth with store of children.
aditi, and all ye gods, that he may attain to old age!
3) the bhagavan mahima (full set of hindu scriptures; 1999) by pandit angirasa muni and his
indra and agni, moved by songs, come to the juice, the precious dew:
who must be praised in holy rites, the priest most welcome in the house.
joying thereat, o indra, with thy bay steeds come:. ascend thy golden-coloured car.
a that i whip of yours which is rich in sweetness
to vaiçvanara; in that there is (an offering) on eight potsherds, he purifies him with the gayatri, with
4 for, vasu thou precedest every morning, and still hast been the twins' illuminator.
3 sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden goad,
4 agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero, and sent the sage who wins a thousand cattle.
6 most near, most oft comes indra with protection, and she sarasvati, who swells with rivers parjanya, bringing health with herbs, and agni, well lauded swift to listen, like a father.
worlds. he makes (it) with the metres; the metres are strength; verily he makes it with strength. he
heaven is as it were secret ; verily he makes the world of heaven resplendent for him. he sprinkles
leader of kine and queen of all that strengthens, shine, come as first to us, o high-born morning.
i thou art the plank' of wood, may the skin of aditi recognize thee.
9 the folk, o mitra-varuna, who hate you, who sinfully hating pour you no libations,
10 may indra, varuna, mitra, and aryaman vouchsafe us glory and great shelter spreading far.
i stiffen thy pasas as a bowstring upon the bow. embrace thou (women) as the antelope buck the
unites the chief with the chief; verily also in the plants he establishes cattle. 'give directions for the
acting the sage, he flows enrobed in waters and song as 'twere a stall that kine may prosper.
that thou mightst move us to abundant comfort of very splendid wealth with store of horses.
i have beheld the might of this great being. immortal in the midst of tribes of mortals.
here is the gear for friction, here tinder made ready for the spark.
8 send us that strength, vaisvanara, send it, agni, that strength, o jatavedas, full of splendour,
indeed is the march of the thousand (sahásrasyáyana). there are a thousand stotriyas, a thousand gifts
with the offerings of the sacrifice, o lord of the sacrifice,
3 agni, i offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy moutlh.
d o invincible ones, swell with the share for the gods,
away we take the offensiveness that is in thy jaw, away (the offensiveness) in thy mouth, so that, bereft of will,
gladden the gods, gladden the host of maruts: make heaven and earth rejoice, o god, o soma.
a thou i art the abode of riches for me; thou art the resort of the afflicted for me; protect me when in
the woods are given to the birds. these statutes of the god savitar none disobeyeth.
8 may the prayerful couples be blessed with sons and daughters, and may such couples enjoy
may the earth and the heaven be auspicious and troublefree for you. may the sunshine bring you blessings.
worlds; (verily it serves) to keep apart these two worlds. again the viraj has ten syllables, the viraj is
let not the guileful wicked man be lord of us:-still may we prosper, singing goodly hymns of praise.
when wilt thou make us glorious? make this, only this thine end and aim. now, indra! yoke thy two bay steeds.
14 the wrath of brahmanaspati according to his will had full effect when he would do a mighty deed.
5 loud roarers, giving strength, devourers of the foe, they make the winds, they make the lightnings
offer to the seasons, he would cause strife with the gods; having offered the offering of first-fruits, he
i whatever law of thine, o god, o varurna, as we are men,
sniffs the calf on birth. the agrayana is the self of the sacrifice; at each pressing he draws it; verily he
as this great earth holds the animals scattered far, thus shall thy embryo be held fast, to produce a child after
may agni, may vaisvanara with vigour, present, preserve us day and night from foemen.
the maruts, bounteous givers, sending forth their voice, in the wild joy of soma wrought their glorious
who slayeth vrtra and acquireth booty, giver of blessings, maghavan the bounteous:
12 high, glorifier of his friend, he knows all generations, he whom many praise.
over up to the mouth ; verily on the mouth he bestows food-eating upon him. 'with the lordship of
from the wind thy breath i have obtained, from the sun thine eye; thy soul i hold fast in thee: be together with
4 he like a falcon settles down amid the families of men.
has declared the ten-night rite to be the prosperity of the sattra, and the ten-night rite serves for the
open to question' at the morning pressing'; he who knows thus is not liable to question from his foe;
13 he lays his blows upon their backs, he deals his blows upon their thighs.
piercing and brightly shining-at your glad carouse-served with trimmed grass at sacrifice. thou waxest
do not please god. only those who stay away from sins and from denigrating others and make a pious
which he does when he digs; he pours water over, for expiation he pours (water) mixed with barley;
3 bringing good tidings, bird of happy omen, call thou out loudly southward of our dwellings,
ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which gods unsoiled by dust had bound.
but to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well-dressed woman to her husband.
6 do this, o agni, when we urge thee, quickly, triumphant in thy might subdue our foemen.
stronghold.' he said, 'thou art called he who smites in the stronghold. now a boar, stealer of the good,
each one solicits him for wealth and seeks renown to prosper him.
bring to us all things excellent, o satakratu, food and strength,
4 with strength of limb the hero slays the hero, when bright in arms they range them for the combat.
or coursers who have triumphed in, the contest, or those who famed, have won the prize with glory.
no providence but yours alone is with me so have i wrought for you this hymn for succour.
wcll have they eaten and rejoiced; the friends have risen and passed away:
3 existence, in the earliest age of gods, from non-existence sprang.
shree krishna now poses many questions himself, and asks arjun to listen carefully to their answers.
enjoy, o jatavedas, this our fuel, and bring the gods to us to taste oblations.
indra slew thy first ancestor, o serpent, and since they are crushed, what strength, forsooth, can be theirs?
shree krishna had previously used the expression yaḥ paśhyati sa paśhyati (they alone truly see, who see that…) now he states that it is not enough to see the presence of the soul within the body. we must also appreciate that god, the supreme soul, is seated within all bodies. his presence in the heart of all living beings was previously stated in verse 13.23 in this chapter. it is also mentioned in verses 10.20 and 18.61 of the bhagavad gita, and in other vedic scriptures as well:eko devaḥ sarvabhūteṣhu gūḍhaḥsarvavyāpī sarvabhūtāntarātmā (śhwetāśhvatar upaniṣhad 6.11)“god is one. he resides in the hearts of all living beings. he is omnipresent. he is the supreme soul of all souls.”bhavān hi sarva-bhūtānām ātmā sākṣhī sva-dṛig vibho (bhagavatam 10.86.31)“god is seated inside all living beings as the witness and the master.”rām brahma chinamaya abināsī, sarba rahit saba ura pura bāsī (ramayan)“the supreme lord ram is eternal and beyond everything. he resides in the hearts of all living entities.”the supreme soul accompanies the individual soul as it journeys from body to body in the cycle of life and death. shree krishna now explains how realizing the presence of god in everyone changes the life of the sādhak.
thou, the remedy called p6tudru, art the body of agni, the deliverer, slayer of rakshas, slayer of rivals,
at whose close touch things solid shake, and what is stable yields like trees.
with reins easily guided and commanding all. in the deep fall the hide stealeth away their names.
so, through your deity, both gods, enrich us with all pleasantness.
18 by their own power these twain in close succession move;
'do thou make me go to the world of heaven', he says; verily she makes him go to the world of heaven.
they that pierce the heart, creep along the ribs, without doing injury, without causing disease, they shall run
23 when he goes forth, ye pair of kings, for booty, speeding to war and praise to please the singer,i was the dearest sage of those about him,-let him lead these away and bring them safely.
.2 prapathaka 2: the preparation of the ground for the fire
form of food; (verily it serves) for prosperity. he who desires power should offer a ruddy (beast) to
.6.11 mantra 11: the mantras of the hotr at the samvargesti
13 let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpouring juice:
agni is threefold ; verily he makes agni attain support through all his extent. now he casts away
16 may plentiful libations of the people, and singing rsis' holy prayers rejoice thee.
o agni, with the concluding bath have i obtained; thee, o agni, with the barren cow have i obtained;
26 yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, indra, thou governest the folk.
2 the warrior, son of warrior sire, invokes thee, to gain great strength that may be won as booty:
driving off raksasas and yatudhanas, the god is present, praised in hymns at evening.
4 for ye, o indra-vayu, mount the goldenseated car that aids
side is the more resplendent. 'the sixteenfold stoma', (with these words he puts down) on the north; the
straightway the bold one left the fiends behind him and passed the winds as he grew yet more mighty.
2 near him thou seemest mightier still in native glory, set to hold
fixed on all sides to the ukkhishta as the (spokes of the) wheel to the nave.
20 with plenty for his true ally the active man will gain the spoil.
through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful singer, like sura by his fair and open pathways.
abode; to them he sacrifices when the next day comes. by means of a vow is agni, lord of vows, pure,
success, attainment, accomplishment, control, greatness, prosperity, supreme attainment, and wellbeing rest
7 all sacrificial viands wait on agni as the seven mighty rivers seek the ocean.
and yet he resides in even the tiniest drop of water.
3 where are your newest favours shown? where, maruts, your prosperity?
5 she who is rich in spoil, the spouse of surya, wondrously opulent, rules all wealth and treasures.
the victim. he offers to visnu çipivista; visnu çipivista is the redundancy of the sacrifice, the greatness
the sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman. may this your gift, ye shakers, be distinguished.
stir up the wrath and hatred due to one who holds an alien creed.
for these specific mantras (below), we have replaced the century-old british translations from sacredtexts with our newer translations (based on comparing the angirasa muni ideas versus the british
9 come, maghavan, friend of man, to aid the singer imploring thee in battle for the sunlight.
1 in the beginning, there was neither existence nor non-existence. there was neither air nor space.
a homage to the strong, the piercing, to the lord of assailers homage!
him. he who has a dispute over a field or with his relatives should offer a cake on eight potsherds to
slacken the strong bows of the demondriven: destroy our foemen whether kin or stranger.
3 o singer, with the singers, o gracious, with those who move at dawn,
is fivefold, cattle are fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice and cattle. he who piles for a second time
liable to injure him. he puts down the mortar; this is the navel of the fire; verily he piles the fire with its
thou art the winner of thunder; thou art the winner of rain.
even him who, dear as heaven's own light, gives to our princes high renown.
having performed the rite with the omentum, he performs with the cake; the cake is strength; verily he
thou art born of the gods, thou art soma's good friend. be thou propitious to my in-breathing and my outbreathing, and to this eye of mine!
the soma. the remains of it tvastr cast upon the ahavaniya (fire), saying, 'hail! wax great, indra's foe.
o vayu, never shall the cows grow thin, never for thee shall they be dry.
year; offspring are born in the course of the year; (verily it serves) for the propagation of offspring. the
forth come to us with all his fires that agni, whose the mighty are,
5 when, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, mortals bethink them not of sacrificing,
from the rain of parganya we have risen up, immortal. i free thee from all evil and disease, (and) unite thee
thou goest with red winds: bliss hast thou in thine home. as pusan thou thyself protectest worshippers.
k do thou sit down in the lap of this mother,
even the strong hand the bold player conquers, as the skilled gambler heaps up his winnings at the proper
13 worthy of laud, o agni, is that kinship which thou hast with gods.
8 the foeman's sinful enmities, indra and agni, vex me sore.
in thee, o son of strength, all gods are centred. indra art thou to man who brings oblation.
smote him. he said, 'thou art called he who brings from the stronghold; bring him.' so the sacrifice bore
31 drive hither those, and these again bring hither: the war-drum speaks aloud as battle's signal.
6 o agni, shining of thyself by night and when the morning breaks,
approach, o indra, basting thee, lord of bay horses, to our prayers:
he hides him in the secret couple's bosom. the bird dwells in the middle of the fountain.
who measured out the ancient seat, who pillared both the worlds apart as the unborn supported
5 thus, soma, conqueror of wealth! flow, finding furtherance for us,
2 for they are kings of noblest might, of glorious fame most widely spread;
indra, to thee i sing, to dyaus, to rudra glorious in himself,
2 for thee, o purifier, flow the drops of fatness rich in oil.
the pan is the concentrated light of these lights; in that he puts down the pan, verily he wins the light
7 she seeketh men, as she who hath no brother, mounting her car, as 'twere to gather riches.
4 may ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear thee forward on the distant pathway.
t measured and commensurate, to aid us, harmonious, at this sacrifice, o maruts.
15 this is that agni, saviour from the foeman, who guards the kindler of the flame from sorrow:
inviting those we long for, earth and heaven, the singer calleth these nasatyas hither.
two birds of mighty power are seated near her, there where the deities receive their portion.
deer-skins are on their shoulders, on their fellies knives: they spread their glory out as birds spread out
thou, very gracious god, bast thousand medicines: inflict no evil on our sons or progeny.
the apâmârga is sole ruler over all plants, with it do we wipe mishap from thee: do thou then live exempt from
puts down) on the west; the twenty-onefold is support; (verily it serves) for support. 'the shining, the
who yoketh thee? let him yoke thee. let visnu yoke thee, for the prosperity of this sacrifice, for my
with reverence gods and mortals have established thee as everwatchful and almighty household lord.
2 the hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship: to the kine came the bull, the heifer's offipring
do ye, (o grains), remain in the (winnowing-) basket, while (the wind) blows over you; be separated, ye who
8 touched by the goad the shaggy beast went nobly, bound to the pole by the yoke's thong of leather.
for the maruts; the mixed one for indra and agni; the one spotted below for savitr; the ram for varuna.
the gods are destroyers of the sacrifice, stealers of the sacrifice ; they sit these worlds taking and
the atmosphere was the net, the great regions (of space) the (supporting) poles of the net: with these sakra
between this heaven and earth thy noise shall spread, thy sounds shall quickly part to every side! shout thou
bring thou to us heroic strength: thou hast a man's regard for us.
may these new hymns and prayers that i have fashioned delight you to the profit of the singer.
viands attend the car that beareth heroes, your car, ye sovran pair, indra and vayu.
i call the gods of lofty glory for our weal, the makers of the light, well-skilled in sacrifice;
for thy new love and favour are we present: let us invoke thee, indra, as our welfare.
treasure hides it. to agni svistakrt he speaks aloud; it is as if one who has found a rich treasure is fain
kinsmen all, of one mind, to the glory of this mighty guardian!
thou didst refresh the streams and force the billows: thou, indra, settest free obstructed rivers.
having said that worship of the personal form is the best, shree krishna clarifies that in no way does he reject the worship of the formless. those who devote themselves to the all-pervading, indefinable, unmanifest, inconceivable, immovable, eternal brahman, also attain god.living beings are of an infinite variety of natures. the supreme lord who has created this variety also possesses an infinite variety of aspects to his personality. for the sake of our finite comprehension, we classify the infinite manifestations of god into categories. accordingly, ved vyas has classified god’s various manifestations into three types, brahman, paramātmā, and bhagavān, as mentioned in the commentary of the previous verse. one may worship either of these categories, but one should never claim that one’s conception of god is the only correct one while those of the others are erroneous.in verse 4.11, shree krishna had stated: “in whatever way people surrender unto me, i reciprocate accordingly. everyone follows my path, knowingly or unknowingly, o son of pritha.” here, shree krishna confirms that the worshippers of the formless also reach him. since their choice is to unite with the attributeless manifestation of the supreme absolute truth, god meets them as the unmanifest, all-pervading brahman.
the one hundred and one persons whom the earth did cast off, because they had injured the offspring of a
he hath come hither with (lightnings) that smile like kindly (women);
thereby they bestowed upon it radiance. for him who desires splendour he should offer this oblation
verily he has recourse to brahmanaspati with his own share; verily he subjects his fellows to him; he
lord of a hundred powers, may we once firmly cling to thy fair favours even as husbands to their
prayers have been offered up through love of glory: vasistha, honour indra in the battle.
relaxed is the opening of thy bladder like the ocean, the reservoir of water--thus let thy urine be released, out
b ye two are bays; ye are the grains for the bays, mixed with soma.
but he who offers the sacrifice does so with the wish, 'may it be in my vital airs. if they omit the
24 cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, o agni, that is bright with flame,
others here claiming friendship to their friendship, devoted unto thee, in thee were joyful.
being thee, for not being thee; for the waters thee, for the plants for
elbow of the samidhenis, puts his enemy in his elbow. he joins the half-verses; this is the elbow of the
agai was thy third husband: now one bornof woman is thy fourth.
three bodies hast thou which the gods delight in: with these protect our hymns with care unceasing.
our domestics; may not, ye gods, the pigeon here do harm to us!
2 drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, and fill thee full, o lord of tawny horses.
5 the offspring of a lofty power, daksa's two sons exceeding strong,
father, he became their son; there is, verily, no other force, higher than he.
4 waters from sacrifice came to the gandharva visvavasu, o soma, when they saw him.
the puranas relate the story of the sacrifice offered by the great sage dadhichi, which was unparalleled in history. indra, the king of heaven was once driven out of his celestial kingdom by a demon named vritrasura. the demon had a boon whereby he could not be killed by any weapon known till then. in desperation, indra approached lord shiv for help, who took him to lord vishnu. vishnu revealed to indra that the only weapon that could kill vritrasura was a thunderbolt made from the bones of the sage dadhichi. indra then beseeched dadhichi to make the ultimate sacrifice of laying down his life so that his bones could be used for making the thunderbolt. dadhichi accepted the request, but desired to first go on a pilgrimage to all the holy rivers. indra then brought together all the waters of the holy rivers to naimisharanya, thereby allowing the sage to have his wish fulfilled without further loss of time. dadhichi then gave up his body by the practice of yogic techniques. the thunderbolt made from his bones was then used to defeat the demon vritrasura, allowing indra to regain his place as the king of the celestial abodes. shree krishna deliberately refers to this thunderbolt here as the representation of the glory of god, preferring it above the mace and disc that are always held in the hands of lord vishnu.in this verse, shree krishna also reveals that the act of sexual intercourse is not unholy when it is performed for the sole purpose of begetting good children. kaamdev, the god of love (cupid), is responsible for the force of attraction between the opposite sexes that facilitates the continuance of humankind through procreation. this sexual urge has its origin in god, and should not be mis-utilized for sensual enjoyment, but rather be used solely for the purpose of begetting worthy progeny. in verse 7.11 as well, shree krishna had declared that he is the sexual desire that is not in conflict with virtue and scriptural injunctions.
when, mightiest! hero-girt! nahusa heroes boast them in thee, the triply-strong defender.
away from us may thousand-eyed, immortal (evil) dwell! him whom we hate may it strike, and him whom we
when shree krishna appeared on the earth, seemingly as a human being, he conducted himself in all ways and manners, appropriate for his position in society, as a member of the royal warrior class. if he had acted otherwise, other human beings would begin to imitate him, thinking that they must copy the conduct of the worthy son of the righteous king vasudev. had shree krishna failed to perform vedic duties, human beings following his example would be led away from the discipline of karm, into a state of chaos. this would have been a very serious offence and lord krishna would be considered at fault. thus, he explains to arjun that if he did not fulfill his occupational duties, it would cause pandemonium in society.similarly, arjun was world-famous for being undefeated in battle, and was the brother of the virtuous king yudhisthir. if arjun refused to fulfill his duty to protect dharma, then many other worthy and noble warriors could follow his example and also renounce their prescribed duty of protecting righteousness. this would bring destruction to the world balance and the rout of innocent and virtuous people. thus, for the benefit of the entire human race and the welfare of the world, shree krishna coaxed arjun not to neglect performing his prescribed vedic activities.
many people are at the level of mechanical practice. they perform the rituals enjoined by their religious creed, but do not engage their mind in god. when they purchase a new house or a new car, they call the pundit to perform the pūjā (worship) ceremony. and while the pundit performs the pūjā, they sit and talk in the other room or sip a cup of tea. for them, devotion is nothing more than performing the empty ritual. it is often performed by way of ceremonial habits that have been passed on from parents and elders. performing rituals mechanically is not a bad thing, for after all, something is better than nothing. at least such people are externally engaging in devotion.however, shree krishna says that higher than mechanical practice is the cultivation of spiritual knowledge. knowledge bestows the understanding that the goal of life is god-realization and not material progress. one who is versed in knowledge goes beyond the empty rituals and develops the desire to purify the mind. but mere knowledge by itself cannot cleanse the heart. and thus, shree krishna says that higher than the cultivation of knowledge is the process of engaging the mind in meditation. by practically controlling the mind through meditation, we begin to develop detachment from worldly pleasures. when the mind develops some measure of the quality of detachment, we can then practice the next step, which is renunciation of the fruits of actions. as explained in the previous verse, this will help remove worldliness from the mind and strengthen the intellect for the subsequent higher stages.
7 here, urged by hands, loudly hath rung the press-stone wherewith navagvas through ten months
animal is offered to vayu, therefore he does not depart; in that a cake is offered to prajapati, therefore he
as he who finds a shade in fervent sunlight may i, uninjured, win the bliss of rudra.
he pours a libation on either side of the omentum; verily he delights both (sets of gods).
let us approach thee shining in thy dwelling, kneeling upon our knees, with adoration.
take thou another path than this, and as thou listest walk thereon.
6 like as he is beheld such is he said to be.
to him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to agni let the lauds go forth!
he bestows power upon himself. by three people is this to be performed, him who performs a year-long
dearest to gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with thy stream,
11 thoughts ancient, seeking wealth, with adoration, with newest lauds have sped to thee, o mighty.
and now that thou, o pavamana, art above this earth and heaven and all existence in thy might,
the mother shall sleep, the father shall sleep, the dog shall sleep, the lord of the house shall sleep! all her
pure, fit for sacrifice, and divine, that was set free. they became the vahantis. he takes of the vahantis;
8 our songs of praise have glorified indra who ruleth by his might,
27 borne by your golden-footed steeds, o gods, come hither to receive
whence he shall not again in all successive years return, while the sun is upon the heavens!
12 whether with indra ye be faring, asvins, or resting in one dwelling-place with vayu,
him who beholds the universe, the sun-god, seven strong and youthful coursers carry onward.
then do i see them and also do i hear them; their sound, their voice doth come to me. when, ye goldencoloured, i have refreshed myself with you, then i ween, ambrosia (amrita) am i tasting!
to the gods, full of sweetness; enter the giver', he says; 'we here are givers; do ye there enter us, full of
.5 sukta 5 – charm with the plant, silaki (laksha, arundhati) for the cure of wounds
with twenty-one beans he approaches the head of the man; beans are impure, the man's head is impure;
11 this soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the braided locks:
greatness in this form. 'yoke ye the ass', (with these words) (he halters) the ass; verily he establishes the
day , on which the horse is slain, there are twelve months, five seasons; these worlds are three; the
11 spouses of heroes, goddesses, with whole wings may they come to us
23 as holy food, agni, to thine'invoker give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels.
4 the tawny pavamana, who strews from of old the grass with might,
speech, to agni and visnu the body of him who long is ill. for him who is long ill or who desires, 'may
or pressed among the races five24 may these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon us, as they flow,
4 simply, ye mighty ones, i ask the gods of that wondrous oblation hallowed by the mystic word.
9 praising with songs the praise-worthy who cometh to our aid, we call
pressing with eleven . the third pressing belongs to the all-gods with the rbhus. in that they offer to
rich with the light ofheaven was then the help ye gave, and marvellous your succour when ye stood by
these are the deities, overlords of these animals; to them he is cut off who puts down the heads of the
5 praise ye the bull among the cows; for 'tis the maruts' sportive band:
14 from this our misery and famine set us free, from this dire curse deliver us.
rathantara (saman) has the pañcadaça (stoma); verily they win power. the brhat has the saptadaça ,
he, stirring both the races, goes between the two, the bearer of the word of men and word of gods.
cattle of the sacrificer. when they are leading northward the sacrificial animal over which the apris
god, thy bays turn not from the rite which law ordains.
went to manu; the gods and the asuras called severally upon her, the gods directly, the asuras
the sacrifice of him whose offering is too large is unsuccessful; 'surya, the god, for those that sit in the
may the five priests' lord, dwelling in oblations, bliss-giving asura, hear, whose paths are open.
7 as soon as, at libations of his mother, great visnu had drunk up the draught, he plundered.
he pours seed; along the thigh he causes it to flow, for along the thigh is seed poured; baring the thigh he
earth. they are alive, refresh the livino, and are firmly rooted: may agni heat them, after they have been poured
when flying off thou singest thou art like a lute. with brave sons in assembly may we speak aloud.
sons of sudhanvan, after your long journeying, ye came unto the home of liberal savitar.
a hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, and full of sacred truth.
the two world-halves, the spirited, the beautiful, because the father hath clothed them in goodly forms.
may agni who cooks thee protect thee on the east, indra with the maruts protect thee on the south! may
beautiful be thy union with the body, beloved in the gods' sublimest birthplace!
he who beholdetb all existing creatures observetb well the zeal that is in mortals.
wherewith ye travel swiftly through the regions to the prompt worshipper who brings oblation.
may indra come to us for our protection; here be the hero, praised, our feast-companion.
with wisdom i present these lively praises of bhavya dweller on the bank of sindhu;
where is that hero? who hath looked on indra borne on light-rolling car by tawny coursers,
19 thou from the lofty plains above, o indra, hurledst vrtra down.
they have been poured upon the reece towards the meath-distilling vat:
cooked foods that have remained for more than one yām (three hours) are classified in the mode of ignorance. foods that are impure, have bad taste, or possess foul smells come in the same category. impure foods also include all kinds of meat products. nature has designed the human body to be vegetarian. human beings do not have long canine teeth as carnivorous animals do, or a wide jaw suitable for tearing flesh. carnivores have short bowels to allow minimal transit time for the unstable and dead animal food, which putrefies and decays faster. on the contrary, humans have a longer digestive tract for the slow and better absorption of plant food. the stomach of carnivores is more acidic than human beings, which enables them to digest raw meat. interestingly, the carnivorous animals do not sweat through their pores. rather, they regulate body temperature through their tongue. on the other hand, herbivorous animals and humans control bodily temperature by sweating through their skin. while drinking, carnivores lap up water rather than suck it. in contrast, herbivores do not lap up water; they suck it. humans too suck water while drinking; they do not lap it up. all these physical characteristics of the human body reveal that god has not created us as carnivorous creatures, and consequently, meat is considered impure food for humans.meat-eating also creates bad karma. the manu smṛiti states:māṁ sa bhakṣhayitā 'mutra yasya māṁsam ihādmy ahametan māṁsasya māṁsatvaṁ pravadanti manīṣhiṇaḥ (5.55)[v2]“the word mānsa (meat) means “that whom i am eating here will eat me in my next life.” for this reason, the learned say that meat is called mānsa (a repeated act: i eat him, he eats me).”
indra, these friends of ours, supplied with soma, wait and look to thee
5 speed happily those, as surya ends his journey, who meet his wish as bridegrooms meet their
they first perform the jyotistoma; verily by it they find support in this world. they perform secondly
4 now for the mortal worshipper, o heroes, for him who served you, was the gift of riches.
with indra joined ye drove away misfortunes, yea foes of prthusravas, o ye mighty.
on every side about the earth and heaven go forth the spacious paths without a limit.
like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to brhaspati our hymns have sounded.
2 to thee with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds we come.
5 for you shall ausija call him who thunders, as, to win arjuna's assent, cried ghosa.
and rain, to them ten eastwards, ten to the south, ten to the west, ten to the north, ten upwards; to them
1 with words sent forth in holy hymns, agni we supplicate, the lord
had three heads, one which drank soma, one sura, and one which ate food. he promised openly the
the theologians say, 'should the soma be clarified or not?' soma indeed is the king of plants; whatever
14 for indra flows the gladdening drink, the measurer of the region, sage,
is lauded, excellent, with hundred praises by purunitha, son of satavani.
4 since matarisvan, far-diffused, bath stirred him, and he in every house grown bright and noble,
may the greatness of the gangida protect us about on all sides, (the greatness) with which he has overcome
through holy disciplehood, through creative fervour, the gods drove away death. indrajorsooth, by his holy
so agni, much-invoked, bring hither with all speed the gods, the excellently wise,
9 the many seek the great steed as a stallion: the reins obey the lord of varied colour.
when kindled). i have paid reverence, o death, to thine eye, reverence to thy breath.
to visnu thee! this is thy birthplace; to indra, eager for praise, thee!
13 the wise and holy deities engendered agni vaisvanara whom age ne'er touches.
the choirs have established indra king for ever for victory him, whose anger is resistless:
as the-soul with the soul's desires swiftly to a distance flies, thus do thou, o cough, fly forth along the soul's
it spreads abroad when butter hath been offered it, and balmed with streams of butter shines forth like
17 even, indra, that carouse which slays the vrtras best, most widely famed,
b thou art the strong, grasped by mind, acceptable to visnu.
food. as for four, the quarters are four; verily they find support in the quarters. there are atiratras on
3 hither let indra come from earth or heaven, hither with speech from firmament or ocean;
3 cheer us the roamer round, who strikes at morning, the wind delight us, pourer forth of waters!
9 so let not rasa, krumu, or anitabha, kubha, or sindhu hold you back.
6 help us, thou brahman, best of all invokers of the gods in song.
verily in force and strength and in cattle they find support. there are three trayastrinças before, and
offers) to agni, the purifier , thereby he bestows speech upon him; in that (he offers) to agni, the
the broad (directions) where the fagots that fence in (the fire), the earth turned itself into a fire-altar. there
in what?' he should offer them while wandering round; verily he appeases him completely . the
streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
who sends a song effectual, firmly-grasping, and strength-bestowing, he comes near the mighty.
whether, o asvins, ye this day be far remote or near at hand,
cattle'; tvastr is the form-maker of the pairings of cattle, and thereby he confers upon himself the form
5 o hero, lord of bounties, praised in hymns, may power and joyfulness
he that has undertaken it has not been able to accomplish it: he broke his foot, his toe. he, luckless,
4 may that much-lauded indu, with a heart inclined to us, well-knowing, fight against our enemies.
he honours it with a verse addressed to varuna; verily he honours it with its own deity.
36 seven germs unripened yet are heaven's prolific, seed: their functions they maintain by visnu's
2 hither hath soma flowed unto the beakers, like a chariot-horse, a stallion swift upon his way.
his care is that which speeds his might in conflicts, like wind borne onward by the clouds that thunder.
for day and night, for the stars, for sun and moon, and for us prepare good weather, o king sakadhûma!
shall call up to the dish: on shall come the young knowing their nest!
agni, invested with his golden colours, before the thunder strike and lay you senseless!
welcome them, o ye heroes, and come bither. loud may we speak. with brave men, in assembly.
unclose, our manly hero! thou for ever bounteous, yonder cloud
holy order', he says; the circumference of holy order is the sky; verily he conquers the sky. 'thee for the
8 resplendent are thy rays of light: loud is thy voice like pressing-stones.
bold thoughts are in your heads, your weapons in your cars, all glorious majesty is moulded on your
verily he has recourse to soma, the strong; verily he bestows upon him seed and strength; he does not
at the beginning; why then is atiratra first employed?' the two atiratras are the eyes of the sacrifice, the
behold the months by the half-months. having made up the months by the new moon night, they leave
turn, go not farther on your way: visit us, o ye wealthy ones.
17 she too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her body in her guile and malice,
as thou with, krsa and samvarta hast rejoiced, so, indra, be thou glad with us.
sacrificer. the theologians say, 'what is it that the sacrificer does in the sacrifice whereby he goes alive
thou oft implored (god)! may we foremost among rulers, unharmed, gain wealth by our cunning devices!
r homage to you horses, and to you, lords of horses, homage!
worshippers have exalted soma with their hymns, and milch kine have come near to meet him with
let none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us!
8 let not the companies of gods fail us, like dawns that float away,
7 well didst thou do that hero deed, o indra, in waking with thy bolt the slumbering ahi.
this gold and bdellium, this balsam, and bhaga (fortune), too; these have prepared thee for husbands, that
5 i gave up mrgaya to srutarvan as his prey because he ever followed me and kept my laws.
enclosing-sticks of buteafrondosa which lie around are in truth his brothers.'
the liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, and conquered those who, unprovoked, assailed them.
if i, o indra, were like thee, the single ruler over wealth.
2 for him, the god who is invoked by many, the two swift bay steeds to the pole i harness,
now at this sacrifice, with all thy maruts, on sacred grass, o team-borne god, rejoice thee.
4 rise up, o agni, spread thee out before us: burn down our foes, thou who hast sharpened arrows.
8 he who for ever vigilant precedes these twain, the day and night,
help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, a lovely hymn in rudra's praise,
all deities within their hearts assented, and ye, nasatyas, are close linked with glory.
16 blazing with splendour, agni, god, through pious gifts of sacred oil,
how then have ancient sages said, o asvins, that ye most swiftly come to stay affliction?
with broom-straw (?), garments, and also with skins they purchased thee: a thing for barter art thou, o plant!
4 this varuna is guide of law, he, mitra, and aryaman, the kings, our work have finished.
the brahmans with their songs exalting indra increased his strength that he might slaughter ahi.
17 as we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteenth part,
11 is he a brother when no lord is left her? is she a sister when destruction cometh?
that we may win us wealth and power we poets, verily, call on thee:
verily in the seasons the year finds support. these are the bricks , called the over-ladies; he for whom
bring what thou deemest worth the wish, o indra that which is in heavem!
in ceaseless flow hath he poured forth his praises, as waters from the ocean's depth, to indra,
5 drawing the gold-yoked car his bays, white-footed, have manifested light to all the peoples.
3 even if, o soma, i neglect thy laws through my simplicity,
12 avoid us thou whose flight is straight, and let our bodies be as stone.
indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, honoured as breaker-down of forts.
16 thine, indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest the mid-most wealth,
from earth ye brought the sage to life in wondrous mode; be your great deeds done here for him who
h the breath of the sacrificer is apart from the victim;
it has shone upon thee, light has arisen, darkness has departed from thee. we remove from thee death,
he makes the oxen and the horses look with him. so many are the animals , bipeds and quadrupeds;
6 the bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands in bearded confidence;
7 we have elected thee as most delightful for thy beams' glow: hear our great laud, o agni.
how long hast thou bebaved as one who wavers? cast thy hot dart at him who hates devotion:
ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in three spots: in all, ten thousand kine.
9 lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above the earth.
16 pardon, we pray, this sin of ours, o agni, -- the path which we have trodden, widely straying,
7 as in a ship through billows, so through regions of air, with blessings, through toils and troubles
g may he that filleth never miss of fullness. let me not be parted with life.
thousand million, and ten thousand million, and a hundred thousand million, and ten hundred thousand
o indra, let thy long-maned bays, yoked by prayer, bring thee hitherward!
more humbly than even a bad man . in that he mixes (the cup) for (tvastr) with the wives with ghee,
5 nine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid-most here, o visvakarman,
form he wins vaiçvanara. if he desire of a man, 'may he become hungry', he should put down for one (a
great indra will i laud, in whom all people who drink the soma have attained their longing;
they kill the soma in that they press it; in that there is (an oblation) of soma, that is as when they slay
10 a rbhu art thou, agni, near to be adored thou art the sovran lord of foodful spoil and wealth.
of the sacrifice', they replied. let us choose a boon; let there be drawn a cup for us also herein.' for them
wind-sped, the skillful ones in rapid motion have in an instant compassed round the heaven.
of asuras had pierced with gloom. this none besides had power to do.
5 this power of his shone brightly forth when indra brought together, like
daughter; by her drive away my enemies; breath, cattle, and life shall give them a wide birth!
who gives, as 'twere in thousands, precious wealth to him who sheds the juice and worships him.
5 o indra maghavan, by thee protected may we be thine, princes and priests and singers,
wonderful let your coming be, wondrous with help, ye bounteous ones,
as fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, their offspring, as a thread continuously spun out.
far from us still be varuna's displeasure may indra give us spacious room to dwell in.
kind be the pious skilful-handed rbhus, kind be the fathers at our invocations.
food. 'honour to thy heat, thy blaze', he says, for paying honour they wait on a richer man; 'may thy
fain to injure the sacrifice; the path of agni and surya is one which the raksases cannot injure. 'i have
6 and let the two exalted heavenly ladies, morning and night, like a cow good at milking,
give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye rudras, lords of ample wealth.
the streams of oil in swelling fluctuation like a red courser bursting through the fences.
'should an animal be offered to vayu, or to prajapati?' they say; if he were to offer it to vayu, he would
becoming gentle, well resting, auspicious, comes to him, and harms him not. the theologians say, 'does
8 this song of bright contents for you is swelling in the men's hall where three-fold grass is.ready.
wise agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether five-wayed, threefold, or seven-threaded.
what laud, o indra-varuna, with oblation, hath like the immortal priest obtained your favour?
12 yea, thee, o agni, do we seek with homage and with fuel, priest
verily he has recourse to brhaspati with his own share; verily he leads him to the top of his equals; the
of strength' , he should put (it) on either upwards or downwards; verily he deprives him of strength. if
prosperously among men'; aryaman is yonder sun; verily he has recourse to aryaman with his own
strength one defeats the enemies that have arisen and those that shall be, by the first half of whose
may we get booty from jur foe in battle, presenting to the gods their share for glory.
hide ye and bury it in pathless darkness that not a man of them may know the other!
.2.5 mantra 5: the mantras for the drinking to the soma
so, marking well, controller of the maruts grant us their blessings, for they are thy dearest.
winning it on every side. the heads of animals are bricks, breath supporting, full of sight; in that he puts
hill-haunting god the goddesses. they bruised him where the roar was loud.
he, flows beholding on his way all well-beloved sacred lore,
have been effused and poured into the beakers, swiftly like rivers running lowly seaward.
5 listen to prthi's call, heroic indra, and be thou lauded by the hymns of venya,
he even now hath yoked his vigorous bay steeds: the vrtra-slayer hath come near.
8 ministers, men, whatever thing ye long for obtain ye quickly bringing gifts to indra.
these are the laws of varuna and mitra. great is the gods' supreme and sole dominion.
make heaven and earth propitious through the power of prayer, and like the sky's bright sheen let
3 nobles, with song i call that car of yours that shines with lengthened life,
2 or if for manu.ye prepared the sacrifice, remember also kanva's son.
savitar, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright with the sunbeams, his eternal lustre;
as ye, gay gods, accept in splendid weather the sacrifice among these folk of manus.
as the birds spread their sheltering wings, spread your protection over us.
agni, atharvan brought thee forth by rubbing from the sky, the head
the gods, the sap of the waters: may it assiduously enliven me with energy!
he bringeth us the booty that he winneth may we, well-loved, continue in his friendship.
paras have their name. in that the paras are drawn, (it serves) to win that which one does not win by the
3 these are ne'er lost, no robber ever injures them: no evil-minded foe attempts to harass them.
8 befriend us thou as knowing all. sage, duly worship thou the gods,
13 thunder, the lightning's daughter, aja-ekapad, heaven's bearer, sindhu, and the waters of the sea:
4 thornless, adityas, is the path, easy for him who seeks the law:
four beakers let us make,- thus spoke the youngest. tvastar approved this rede of yours, o rbhus.
impetuous-tongued, destroying, springing swiftly forth, one to be watched and cherished, strengthener
12 wherewith ye made rasa swell full with water-floods, and urged to victory the car without a horse;
20 the maruts' high protecting aid, the asvins, and the god who saves,
with waters' foam thou torest off, indra, the head of namuchi,
if two libations are offered simultaneously, then one should perform the early litany in the advanced part
5 as such, o caster of the stone, come with thy succours wonderful,
6 they gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strong-winged bird that mounteth sky-ward;
demolish with thy flame his ribs, o agni, the yatudhana's root destroy thou triply.
d homage to the quiver-bearer, and to the owner of the quiver.
king janak attained perfection through karm yog, while discharging his kingly duties. even after reaching the transcendental platform, he continued to do his worldly duties, purely for the reason that it would set a good example for the world to follow. many other saints did the same.humanity is inspired by the ideals that they see in the lives of great people. such leaders inspire society by their example and become shining beacons for the masses to follow. leaders of society thus have a moral responsibility to set lofty examples for inspiring the rest of the population by their words, deeds, and character. when noble leaders are in the forefront, the rest of society naturally gets uplifted in morality, selflessness, and spiritual strength. but in times when there is a vacuum of principled leadership, the rest of society has no standards to pursue and slumps into self-centeredness, moral bankruptcy, and spiritual lassitude. hence, great personalities should always act in an exemplary manner to set the standard for the world. even though they themselves may have risen to the transcendental platform, and may not need to perform prescribed vedic duties, by doing so, they inspire others to perform prescribed vedic actions.if a great leader of society becomes a karm sanyāsī, and renounces work, it sets an errant precedent for others. the leader may be at the transcendental platform and therefore eligible to renounce work and engage completely in spirituality. however, others in society use their example as an excuse for escapism, to run away from their responsibilities. such escapists cite the instances of the great karm sanyāsīs, such as shankaracharya, madhvacharya, nimbarkacharya, and chaitanya mahaprabhu. following their lofty footsteps, these imposters also renounce worldly duties and take sanyās, even though they have not yet attained the purity of mind required for it. in india, we find thousands of such sadhus. they copy the examples of the great sanyāsīs and don the ochre robes, without the concurrent internal enlightenment and bliss. though externally renounced, their nature forces them to seek happiness, and devoid of the divine bliss of god, they begin indulging in the lowly pleasure of intoxication. thus, they slip even below the level of people in household life, as stated in the following verse:brahma jñāna jānyo nahīṅ, karm diye chhiṭakāya,tulasī aisī ātmā sahaja naraka mahñ jāya. [v15]sage tulsidas says: “one who renounces worldly duties, without the concurrent internal enlightenment with divine knowledge, treads the quick path to hell.”instead, if a great leader is a karm yogi, at least the followers will continue to do their karm and dutifully perform their responsibilities. this will help them learn to discipline their mind and senses, and slowly rise to the transcendental platform. hence, to present an example for society to follow, shree krishna suggests that arjun should practice karm yog. he now gives his own example to illustrate the above point.
may they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
therefore from the pruning of trees more (shoots) spring up, for that was what they chose as a boon.
15 to him the mighty one, the self-resplendent, verily strong and great, this praise is uttered.
viçvakarman; the three with piebald bellies are (to be offered) to dhatr; the white-spotted hornless ones
7 this singer excellent at sacrifices, agni the priest, they glorify with homage.
o agni, thou hast been ordained hotar of every sacrifice, by gods, among the race of men.
4 whate'er he meets he grasps and then runs farther on, and straightway, newly born,creeps forward
shree krishna has been explaining how, by performing our duties in the proper consciousness, we can attain perfection. he now describes the excellence that is required for the perfection of brahman-realization. he says in that state of perfection we develop a purified intellect that is established in transcendental knowledge. the mind is controlled due to not indulging in likes and dislikes. the senses are restrained, and the impulses of the body and speech are tenaciously disciplined. the activities for bodily maintenance, such as eating and sleeping, are wisely held in balance. such a yogi is deeply contemplative, and hence prefers solitude. the ego and its lust for power and prestige are dissolved. constantly engaging the mind in transcendence, the yogi is tranquil and free from the bonds of desire, anger, and greed. such a yogi attains realization of the absolute truth as brahman.
when priests who magnify the son of holy law present their gifts,
to visnu. visnu is the sacrifice; verily he unites the sacrifice with the sacrifice. 'the thought divine we
fort-render, lord of wealth, dispelling foemen, indra with lightnings hath o'ercome the dasa.
pours on what has fire, the adhvaryu does not become blind, the raksases do not destroy the sacrifice. 'i
(he offers) an oblation in the house of the divider; the sacrificial fee is a black (ox). to rudra (he offers)
may your gold chariot, drawn by vigorous horses, come to us, blocking up the earth
5 how, and what bond of friendship with a mortal hath the god chosen as this morn is breaking?
are the quarters; verily in the quarters they find support. there can be no sattra where there is no
33 and now to vasa asvya here this stately woman is led forth,
with thy broad thunder,with the beacon, elevated by tile gods that pervade this all, with the lightning do thou not
f with that devotion wherewith the seers performed the session of sacrifice ,
thee we invoke, the guest of men, by whose mouth, even as a sire's,
bull and a cow. the blood which fell rudra seized; it became a fierce red cow. he who desires
2 the food which, mightiest indra, thou possessest worthy of renown
8 when, mighty lord of heroes, thou didst cat a thousand buffaloes,
when wilt thou clothe this poet's laud with plenty, and when wilt thou enrich our hymns with booty?
strong is the red bird in his strength, great hero, who from of old bath had no nest to dwell in.
is rich in food, drawn by red steeds, and holy: by day and night to him shall all be pleasant.
giver of glorious wealth to him who sings his praise, honouring him who toils and pours.
20 aid us, o heroes, for those hymns for which ye helped gosarya erst,
both horses of the cars are yoked,2 she in whose bosom all the gods, and sun and moon for men to see,
2 in thee, effused, o soma, we rejoice ourselves for great supremacy in fight.
grant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present, give them energy, ye fathers.
the bee, o asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the maid carries it purified in her hand.
anus have wrought a chariot for thy courser, and tvastar, much-invoked! thy bolt that glitters.
horseless, yet even through the waste swift-moving, whom no shout can stay,
may the sweet soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit that lies in depth of waters!
prajapati (bricks); in that he takes up the kindling-sticks, and the trees are visnu's, verily he puts down
7 as friend to aid a friend, agni dressed quickly three hundred buffaloes, even as he willed it.
in spiritual practice, the intention of the mind is what matters, not the external activities. one may be living in the holy land of vrindavan, but if the mind contemplates on eating rasgullās in kolkata, one will be deemed to be living in kolkata. conversely, if a person lives amidst the hubbub of kolkata and keeps the mind absorbed in the divine landof vrindavan, he will get the benefit of residing there. all the vedic scriptures state that our level of consciousness is determined by the state of our mind:mana eva manuṣhyāṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ bandha mokṣhayoḥ(pañchadaśhī)“the mind is the cause of bondage, and the mind is the cause of liberation.” jagadguru shree kripaluji maharaj states the same principle:bandhan aur mokṣha kā, kāraṇ manahi bakhānyāte kauniu bhakti karu, karu mana te haridhyān(bhakti śhatak verse 19)“bondage and liberation depend upon the state of the mind. whatever form of devotion you choose to do, keep the mind engaged in meditation upon god.”those who do not possess this spiritual vision see the external distinction between a karm sanyāsī and a karm yogi, and declare the karm sanyāsī to be superior because of the external renunciation. but those who are learned see that both the karm sanyāsī and the karm yogi have absorbed their minds in god, and so they are both identical in their internal consciousness.
indra, and agni, and the asvins, lauded. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
4 the sire of sacrifice, great god of holy bards, agni, the measure and the symbol of the priests,
the god that leads', with the final anustubh he offers; the anustubh is speech; therefore speech is the
dark steeds or ruddy draw his car, or carried in sundry ways he makes them red of colour.
2 with that well-formed most wide-extending palate, wherewith thou ever drinkest streams of
gavisthira hath raised with prayer to agni this laud far-reaching, like gold light to heaven.
i have interposed heaven and earth, also the day, and also the sun. these divine purohitas (chaplains) shall
thou, whip, who urgest horses, drive sagacious horses in the fray.
winner of gold and gear and cattle flow thou on, set as impregner, indu! 'mid the worlds of life!
6 like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest, the twain with their ten girdles have secured
3 guard us, o rudras. with your guar4 save us, ye skilled to save, my we
3 the store of amrta laid away yonder, o vata, in thine home,give us thereof that we may live.
5 there in the east half of the watery region the mother of the cows hath shown her ensign.
18 the priest, when seated, loudly calls you, maruts, praising in song your universal bounty.
12 deft worker, skiful-handed, helpful, holy, may tvastar, god, give us these things to aid us,
shree krishna explained in the last fewverses that all living beings dwell in him. this statement may bring up the following question: “when mahāpralaya (the great annihilation) takes place and the entire world is wound up, then where do all the living beings go?” the answer to this question is being given in this verse.in the previous chapter, verses 8.17to 8.19, shree krishna explained how creation, maintenance, and annihilation follow a repetitive cycle. here, the word kalpa-kṣhaya means “the end of brahma’s lifespan.” on the completion of brahma’s life of 100 years, which is equal to 311 trillion 40 billion earth years, the entire cosmic manifestation dissolves and goes into an unmanifest state. the pañch mahābhūta merge into the pañch tanmātrās; the pañch tanmātrās merge into ahankār; ahankār merges into mahān; mahān merges into prakṛiti, the primordial form of the material energy; and prakṛiti goes and rests in the divine body of the supreme lord, maha vishnu.at that time, all the souls within the material creation also go and rest in the body of god, in a state of suspended animation. their gross and subtle bodies merge back into the source, maya. however, the causal body still remains. (the three kinds of bodies have been described in detail in the commentary to verse 2.28) after dissolution, when god creates the world again, the material energy unwinds in the reverse sequence prakṛiti—mahān—ahankār—pañch tanmātrā—pañch mahābhūta. then, the souls that were lying in a state of suspended animation with only causal bodies are again placed in the world. in accordance with their causal bodies, they again receive subtle and gross bodies, and the various life forms are created in the universe. these life forms vary in nature amongst the different planes of existence. in some planetary systems, fire is the dominant element in the body, just as in the earth plane, the dominant bodily elements are earth and water. hence, the bodies vary in their subtleness and the functions they can perform. shree krishna thus calls them myriad life forms.
may he vouchsafe us triply-barred protection. o earth and heaven, within your lap preserve us.
i, varuna, thou glorious lord, have entered thy lofty home, thine house with thousand portals.
come thou to drink the soma juice, god, longed for on thy team-drawn car!
breath of the mighty dames, the child, speeding the plan of' sacrifice,
the well-born friend hath carved his food with vasus: in all his limbs he hath increased and prospered.
5 be thou, o agni, nearest us with succour, our closest friend while now this morn is breaking.
38 back, forward goes he, grasped by strength inherent, the immortal born the brother of the mortal
19 as ye heard atri's earliest eulogy, so hear syavasva, soma-presser, ye who reel in joy.
18 whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty heaven,
water and milk hath he endued, sent forth to thee: the men have drained him with the filters and
8 yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his goal, hath stepped the conquering courser.
sky, i take acceptable to indra; this is thy birthplace; to indra thee!
like a poisoned arrow, o king, like -an adder, o lord of cattle, is the terrible arrow of the brâhmana: with that
like a host hurried onward comes thy lasso: fierce, with thy tongue thou piercest, as 'twere barley.
calm for these worlds. 'let the steed advance, thundering', he says, for he is a steed. 'the sounding, the
and lays him low. he who piles the fire is consecrated; these are the offerings of the divine consecrators;
food eaten. he pours down from the head, for from the head is food eaten; he causes (the water) to flow
3 not for reward doth pusan send his blessings, bhaga, or aditi: his garb is splendour.
15 accordant with the gods choose for our friend the waters' child: may he be good to us.
continuously , for the continuance of these worlds. he should not break the decades lest he should
earth should he offer it who in ploughing desires support; verily from the sky parjanya rains for him,
, so that the raksases may not creep through. he puts none in front, for the sun rises in front and
6 accept this eulogy of mine whose model is the gayatri:
good horses and good cars have ye, o prsni's sons: ye, maruts, with good weapons go to victory.
5 the youthful daughter of the sun, delighting in you, ascended there your chariot, heroes.
6 twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highest conquering might is thine, subduer!
he, like parjanya with his rain, hath spread himself with thousand, yea, with myriad gifts.
f in unison with the seasons, in unison with the ordainers, in unison with the vasus, in unison with the
.3.7 mantra 7: the nakasad and other bricks of the fifth layer
far let him flee away who speaketh wickedness and vanish like a mote of dust.
33 as priest, o indra, give us wealth in brave men and good steeds ana kine
song-lover! like a charioteer come songs to thee when soma flows.
he covers both all-fostering worlds with praises even as a woman cherishes her children.
2 so hast thou mounted up before us, surya, through these our praises, with fleet dappled horses.
thee here we hand over to the southern direction, to indra as sovereign lord, to the serpent that is striped
the somas skilled in song, the waves have led the water forward, like
choose', he says; verily he gives çamyu barhaspatya his portion. 'success to the sacrifice, success to the
9 waxed strong in might at dawn he tore the sun's wheel off. bright red, he steals away their speech,
vayu is thy yoke-fellow, o steed; i grasp thee; bear me prosperously .
indicate whomsoever he hates; whom he hates , him he indicates as a victim to it. if he hates not, 'the
27 even from far away our songs reach thee, o caster of the stone:
11 on the high places ye have made the grass for man, and water in the valleys, by your skill, o men.
(thyself) a male, step thou upon the hide of the male (steer): go, call thither all that is dear to thee! at whatever
the entire downward spiral leading to ruin begins with contemplating happiness in sense objects. now, the urge for happiness is as natural to the soul as thirst is to the physical body. it is impossible to think “i will not contemplate happiness anywhere,” because it is unnatural for the soul. the simple solution then is to envision happiness in the proper direction, i.e. in god. if we can repeatedly revise the thought that happiness is in god, we will develop attachment toward him. this divine attachment will not degrade the mind like material attachment; rather, it will purify it. god is all-pure, and when we attach our mind to him, the mind will also become pure.thus, whenever shree krishna asks us to give up attachment and desire, he is referring only to material attachment and desire. spiritual attachment and desire are not to be given up; in fact, they are most praiseworthy. they are to be cultivated and increased for purification of the mind. the greater the burning desire we develop for god, the purer our mind will become. the jñānīs who propound the worship of the undifferentiated attributeless brahman do not understand this point when they recommend giving up all attachments. however, shree krishna states: “those who attach their minds to me with unadulterated devotion rise above the three modes of material nature and attain the level of the supreme brahman.” (bhagavad gita 14.26) he repeatedly urges arjun to attach his mind to god in many verses ahead, such as 8.7, 8.14, 9.22, 9.34, 10.10, 12.8, 11.54, 18.55, 18.58, 18.65, etc.attachment and aversion are two sides of the same coin. aversion is nothing but negative attachment. just as, in attachment, the object of attachment repeatedly comes to one’s mind; similarly, in aversion, the object of hatred keeps popping into the mind. so attachment and aversion to material objects both have the same effect on the mind—they dirty it and pull it into the three modes of material nature. when the mind is free from both attachment and aversion, and is absorbed in devotion to god, one receives the grace of god and experiences his unlimited divine bliss. on experiencing that higher taste, the mind no longer feels attracted to the sense objects, even while using them. thus, even while tasting, touching, smelling, hearing, and seeing, like all of us, the sthita prajña is free from both attachment and aversion.
5 streams! the wise gods have thrice three habitations. child of three mothers, he is lord in synods.
after they have been slain, dogs shall devour upon the ground!
4 him, blessed one, the seven strong floods augmented, him white at birth and red when waxen
sit down, o friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself:
c homage to you sharpers, and to you, lords of sharpers, homage!
live thou, thriving a hundred autumns, a hundred winters, and a hundred springs! may indra, agni, savitar,
then both the heaven and earth trembled in terror at the strong hero's thunder when he bellowed.
4 dawn drives away her sister's gloom, and, through her excellence, makes her retrace her path.
the waters verily are healing, the waters chase away disease, the waters cure all (disease): may they prepare
the sadas share in it; with a garment he ties it up; the garment is connected with all the gods ; verily
eaters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, who travel with the deities and indra.
gracious like peace, blessing like mental power, priest was he, offering-bearer, full of thought.
8 may they who formed the swift car, bearing heroes, and the cow omniform and all-impelling,
nasatyas, wheresoe'er ye be, heaven's children, for him who is more liberal than the godless.
or as all-conquering might in war, be that the asvins' noblest grace.
5 like a director, savitar hath extended his golden arms, exceeding fair to look on.
fifteen. as for ten of them, the viraj is ten-syllabled, the viraj is food; verily by the viraj they win food.
9 o asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, ye who are lords of plenteous wealth,
considering his behavior as transgressions toward god, arjun is asking for pardon. while interacting with shree krishna—playing, eating, jesting, talking, and resting—he did not show the respect that is appropriate toward the supreme almighty. however, no one minds transgressions when they are made because of a high level of intimacy shared with the other person. no government officer has the privilege to joke with the president of a country. yet, the president’s personal friend, teases him, jests with him, and even scolds him. the president does not mind, rather he values that jest of an intimate friend more than all the respect he receives from his subordinate officers. thousands of people salute an army general, but they are not as dear to his heart as his wife, who sits intimately by his side. similarly, arjun’s intimate dealings with shree krishna were not transgressions; they were gestures of the depth of his loving devotion in the sentiment of being a friend. yet, a devotee is by nature humble, and so, out of humility, he feels that he may have committed transgressions, and hence he is asking for forgiveness.
ye, lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard: may we as welcome friends reach aryaman's
31 consumptions, from her people, which follow the bride's resplendent train,these let the holy gods again bear to the place from which they came.
graciously- minded he is flowing on his way to win dear names o'er which the youthful one grows
deity, the all-gods, the deity, the maruts, the deity, brhaspati, the deity, indra, the deity, varuna, the
they made for us a way to reach high heaven, they found us day, light, day's sign, beams of morning.
6 the wise sages know; and they tell us about the one unborn lord who upholds the universe.
2 agni of divodasa turned, as 'twere in majesty, to the gods.
not even in wide stronghold may all the folk stand firm who have provoked to anger his surpassing
since the strong rudra, o maruts with brilliant chests, sprang into life for you in prsni's radiant lap.
he who fastens what is firm, the strong, the leader, the brahma, the ten creators of the all, the divinities, are
3 loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meath: they make a humming sound over the
him, even this steer who milks the heavens, him with a thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,
9 dawn with her white herd hath appeared, and in due time hath fire been placed.
3 dispelling gloom this day the wealthy mornings urge liberal givers to present their treasures.
over these beings may i rule, may i be sovran of the folk.
the strong hath flowed forth in a thousand streams, flowed through the filter and the sheep's long
your strong rain-cloud, ye mighty ones, hath swollen, honouring men as 'twere with milk's outpouring.
2 a far-extended pillar that supports the sky the soma-stalk, filled full, moves itself every way.
5 when heroes sang their laud to thee the hero, indra! and stones and aditi accordant,
to him, rjrasva, gave ye eyes, o asvins; light to the blind ye sent for perfect vision.
'the unbroken web of earth may i follow', he says; verily making a bridge he crosses over.
20 ye bore away at night by easy pathways jahusa compassed round on every quarter,
said to be connected with the seasons. those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of eleven nights,
that become for thee a source of life, may that become for thee a source of lustre!
amongst all the gifts we can give to others, the gift of spiritual knowledge is one of the highest, because it has the capacity to transform the recipient eternally. king janak had asked his guru, “the transcendental knowledge you have bestowed upon me is so precious that i feel deeply indebted to you. what can i give you in return?” guru ashtavakra replied, “there is nothing you can give that will relinquish you from your debt. the knowledge i gave was divine and all that you possess is material. worldly objects can never be a price for divine knowledge. but you can do one thing. if ever you find someone who is thirsty for this knowledge, share it with him.” shree krishna states here that he considers the sharing of the knowledge of the bhagavad gita as the highest loving service one can render to god. however, those who lecture on the bhagavad gita should not feel they are doing something very great. the proper attitude of the teacher is to see oneself as an instrument in the hands of god, and to accord all credit to the grace of the lord.
like rays for our enjoyment, lords to feed us, ye, like quick bearers, have obeyed our calling.
4 they who with mighty strength o'erthrow like oxen difficult to yoke,
agni of the front, being delighted with his own portion, burnt in sixteen places the coils of vrtra; by the
savitar, god, hath sentus forth to labour, each quadruped, each biped, to be active.
agni, on thy most easy car, entreated, hither bring the gods!
8 through longing for this sap of yours ye drink what brings ability,
turn towards her with cattle, (thou pot), face towards her, together with the divine powers! neither curses nor
not in me', he said. 'make it ready for him' , he replied. they made it ready for him; they made power
4 germ of the world, the deities' vital spirit, this god moves ever as his will inclines him.
a let brhaspati place thee on the ridge of earth, full of light, for every expiration, inspiration; support all
11 call we on indra, maghavan, auspicious, best hero in the fight where spoil is gathered,
young, sovran rulers, varuna and mitra, the wise and very glorious adityas.
kasyapa has created thee, kasyapa has produced thee. indra wore thee in human (battle); wearing thee in
bring all the gods that they may give us riches, sarasvati, the maruts, asvins, waters.
performed the raksases are fain to destroy the sacrifice; now then is this (place) the beginning of the
14 four coursers with a splendid car, savistha's horses, fleet of foot,
the atmosphere; the third (he draws), by this he conquers yonder world. in that they are drawn, (they
7 o indra-varuna, on you for wealth in many a form i call:
9 he brings together and he parts, the great high priest; extolled is he, in battle brahmapaspati.
20 o agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for thee,
33 we pray to thee for this thy gift, victor the gift that faileth not,
o husband of the tardâ (-female), o husband of the vaghâ (-female), ye of the sharp teeth, listen to me! the
in thee, effused. o soma, we rejoice ourselves for great supremacy in fight:
i make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine own, while i exalt thy sovran might.
longed-for, young, beautiful, and far-resplendent: and sevendear frieuds sprang up unto the mighty.
whom the impetuous maruts look upon with love, who moves in splendour on their ways.
10 'how great his power resistless! how invincible the vrtra-slayer's matchless might!
that we may gain waters and seed and offspring, set thou our princes on thy side, o indra.
they gave themselves new names when soma juice was shed, and under these new names the
interpose the broad atmosphere', he says; verily with these worlds the sacrificer obstructs his foes. the
19 look ye on visnu's works, whereby the friend of indra, close-allied,
fame-loving, praised, hither to me with succour turn having yoked both vigorous bay horses!
where our pious friends live joyously, having left behind the ailments of their bodies, to that world the mother of
should oil the axle with it; verily he extends the sacrifice in the mouth of the sacrifice. they lead agni
having said that the great souls engage in his devotion, shree krishna now explains how they do bhakti. he says that devotees become attached to kīrtan as a means of practicing their devotion and enhancing it. the chanting of the glories of the lord is called kīrtan, which is defined as: nāma-līlā-guṇadīnām uchchair-bhāṣhā tu kīrtanam (bhakti rasāmṛit sindhu 1.2.145) “singing glories of the names, forms, qualities, pastimes, abodes, and associates of god is called kīrtan.”kīrtan is one of the most powerful means of practicing devotion. it involves the three-fold devotion of śhravaṇa (hearing), kīrtan (chanting), and smaraṇa (remembering). the goal is to fix the mind upon god, but it becomes easier when done alongside with hearing and chanting. as stated in chapter six, the mind is as restless as the wind, and naturally wanders from thought to thought. hearing and chanting engage the knowledge senses in the divine realm, which helps in repeatedly bringing back the mind from its wanderings.kīrtan has many other benefits as well. often when people practice devotion through japa (chanting of mantra or name of god on rosary beads) or plain meditation, they find themselves overwhelmed by sleep. however, kīrtan is such an engaging process that it usually drives sleep away. also, chanting blocks out distracting sounds from the environment. kīrtan can be practiced in groups which enables mass participation. in addition, the mind desires variety, which it gets through the medium of kīrtan in the form of the names, virtues, pastimes, abodes, etc. of god. and since kīrtan involves loud chanting, the divine vibrations of the names of god make the entire environment auspicious and holy.for all these reasons, kīrtan has been the most popular form of devotion amongst saints in indian history. all the famous bhakti saints—soordas, tulsidas, meerabai, guru nanak, kabir, tukaram, ekanath, narsi mehta, jayadev, tyagaraja, and others—were great poets. they composed numerous devotional songs, and through them, they engaged in chanting, hearing, and remembering.the vedic scriptures particularly extol kīrtan as the simplest and most powerful process of devotion in the present age of kali.kṛite yad dhyāyato viṣhṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥdwāpare paricharyāyāṁ kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt (bhagavatam 12.3.52)“the best process of devotion in the age of satya was simple meditation upon god. in the age of tretā, it was the performance of sacrifices for the pleasure of god. in the age of dwāpar, worship of the deities was the recommended process. in the present age of kali, it is kīrtan alone.”avikārī vā vikārī vā sarva doṣhaika bhājanaḥparameṣha padaṁ yāti rāma nāmānukīrtanāt (adhyātma ramayan)“whether you are full of desires or free from them, devoid of defects or full of them, if you engage in kīrtan of the names of lord ram, you will attain the highest destination.”sarva dharma bahirbhūtaḥ sarva pāparatasthathāmuchyate nātra sandeho viṣhṇornamānukīrtanāt (vaiśhampāyan samhitā)“even those who are deeply sinful and bereft of religiosity can be saved by the chanting of the names of lord vishnu; of this, there is no doubt.”kalijuga kevala hari guna gāhā, gāvata nara pāvahiṅ bhava thāhā (ramayan)“in this age of kali, there is one means of salvation. by engaging in the chanting of the glories of god, one can cross over this material ocean.”however, one must remember that in the process of kīrtan, hearing and chanting are helpers. the essence is to remember god. if we leave it out, the kīrtan will not purify the mind. thus, shree krishna says here that his devotees do kīrtan, while constantly engaging the mind in thinking of him. they practice this with great determination for the purification of the mind.
2 the seven rivers bear his glory far and wide, and heaven and sky and earth display his comely form.
verily he produces offspring, for him. by that for indra he wins power, by that for the maruts the people,
5 hither his bay steeds have been sent, red steeds are on the sacred grass,,
9 the waters' son hath risen, and clothed in lightning ascended up unto the curled cloud's bosom;
soma, while thou art cleansed, most dear and watchful in the sheep's long wool, most like to angiras! thou hast
what gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceeding strong, even with these incite indra to give us
5 he who grows mightily in herbs, within each fruitful mother and each babe she bears,
your hymns of pleasant sound, praiseworthy, fond of lauds, have come into the hall enclosed for
3 auspicious are the sun's bay-coloured horses, bright, changing hues, meet for our shouts of triumph.
9 agni, the mortal who hath toiled and worshipped, brought thee oblations with his kindled fuel,
the tawny bull hath bellowed. fair as mighty mitra to behold
rastrabhrts are the kingdom, and for the kingdom do they strive who go to battle together; he for whom
with four-and-thirty lights he looks around him, lights of one colour though their ways are divers.
3 desiring food he came unto his mother, and on her breast beheld the pungent soma.
food; verily he finds support in the viraj, in eating food. the atmosphere is as it were unreal; the
3 the sun receive thine eye, tne wind thy spirit; go, as thy merit is, to earth or heaven.
who desires splendour he should offer dewlapped (beasts) , to agni one with a black neck, to indra
glory of the sacrifice', he should pour (it) down, grasping the sadas; verily he bestows upon the
the fire of the plants, and the essence of the bulls shall arouse him! do thou, o indra, controller of
3 about the holy place, the steer true, guileless, noblest, hath sent forth
borne on your lightly-rolling chariot come to us, together with the sunbeams come.
burning. the sacrifice goes away, and turns not back; to him who sacrifices knowing the restoration of
may well attract, with prayer and hands uplifted, the priest of heaven and earth, true sacrificer.
burst through in our favor. may the devas always augment our family-welfare indeed. may the
5 this young exhilarating juice looks downward from its place in heaven,
9 horns made of gold hath he: his feet are iron: less fleet than he, though swift as thought, is indra.
f (thou art) the yavas, the ayavas, the courses, the helpers, the sabda, the ocean, the firm one.
these who are ever new and fresh and youthful. great is the gods' supreme and sole dominion.
4 thou, jatavedas, seekest not the worship of a hostile man,
when, like a pitcher full of gold, o asvins, on the tenth day ye lifted up the buried?
a he offers on eleven potsherds to indra and agni, clotted curds to the maruts, clotted curds to varuna,
may the milch-cows who hasten to their object come harmless unto us with liquid sweetness.
they seize the flying steer at the stream's breathing-place: cleansing with gold they grasp the animal
becomes possessed of cattle . the sun went from this world to yonder world; he having gone to
pour forth on us abundant wealth, o pavamana, with thy stream.
3 1 have attained the gracious-minded fathers, i have gained son and progeny from visnu.
varuna would seize him; if he were not to partake, he would have no cattle, but varuna would not seize
anustubh has thirty-two syllables, the anustubh is the support of the metres; (verily thirty-two serve) for
'tvashtar is preparing a wedding for his daughter,' thus (saying) does this whole world pass through. i free thee
naksatra, mitra the deity; rohini the naksatra, indra the deity; the two viçrts the naksatra; the fathers
in the previous verses, shree krishna spoke about the different worlds and categories of souls. now he speaks of god - the supreme divine personality called the paramātma, which means the supreme soul. the appellation of param emphasizes on the fact that paramātmā is different from ātmā, which is an individual soul, whereas, paramātmā is the supreme soul. he is the transcendental god who controls both the perishable and imperishable worlds. for the non-dualistic philosophers who propagate that individual soul itself is the supreme soul, this verse is clear disapproval of their claim.while the individual soul is very tiny and confined to the material body it resides in; the supreme soul is present inside every living entity. he is the constant companion of the individual soul in every life, immaterial of what species the soul gets born into. he sits in their hearts quietly taking a note; keeping an account of their karmas, and gives appropriate results. for example, in a particular birth, a soul has received a dog’s body. the supreme soul continues to be inside and gives results based on the soul’s past karmas. this explains why even dogs have different destinies. some dogs are born on the streets, live a famished life, and die in misery. whereas, some get to live comfortably as pets in lavish mansions, living a dainty life. this huge difference in destiny is due to the stockpile of karmas from their previous births. the supreme soul which accompanies the soul in its various births, in different species, keeps granting results based on its karmas.the supreme soul also exists in a personal form as the four-armed kshirodakshayi vishnu, commonly known as “bhagwan vishnu”. a popular saying in hindi goes: “mārane vāle ke do hāth, bachāne vāle ke chār hāth” which means, a killer has two arms, but the savior has four arms. the four-armed personality referred to here is the paramātmā, the supreme soul.
3 when with loud cry from heaven down sped the falcon, thence hasting like the wind he bore the bold
the vedas emanated from the breath of god:asya mahato bhūtasya ni śhvasitametad yadṛigvedo yajurvedaḥ sāmavedo ’thavaṅgirasaḥ(bṛihadāraṇyak upaniṣhad 4.5.11) [v9] “the four vedas—ṛig veda, yajur veda, sāma veda, atharva veda—all emanated from the breath of the supreme divine personality.”in these eternal vedas, the duties of humans have been laid down by god himself. these duties have been planned in such a way that through their performance materially engrossed persons may gradually learn to control their desires and slowly elevate themselves from the mode of ignorance to the mode of passion, and from the mode of passion to the mode of goodness. these duties are enjoined to be dedicated to him as yajña. hence, duties consecrated as sacrifice to god verily become godly, of the nature of god, and non-different from him.the tantra sār states yajña to be the supreme divine lord himself:yajño yajña pumāṁśh chaiva yajñaśho yajña yajñabhāvanaḥyajñabhuk cheti pañchātmā yajñeṣhvijyo hariḥ svayaṁ [v10]in the bhāgavatam (11.19.39), shree krishna declares to uddhav: yajño ’haṁ bhagavattamaḥ [v11]“i, the son of vasudev, am yajña.” the vedas state: yajño vai viṣhṇuḥ [v12] “yajña is indeed lord vishnu himself.” reiterating this principle, shree krishna says in this verse that god is eternally present in the act of sacrifice.
here (shall be) the gathering place of the waters, here the dwelling-place of the sea! in the midst of a pond our
fair are ye, as it were, through splendour of his wealth, his in whose sacrifice, o stones, ye find delight.
8 the pivot of the sobharis' chariot within the golden box is balmed with milk.
7 drink of this meath, o indra, thou, and visnu; drink ye your fill of soma, wonder-workers.
3 agni, increase our means of life, increase the house and home of these,
9 o ye of true strength, make this thing manifest by your greatness - strike
tlat thou mayst be our own, joying in power, famed through thy might in every generation.
9 through thee, kind -prosperer, o brahmanaspati, may we obtain the wealth of men which all desire:
grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a thousand ornaments.
so let the vasus grant us strength and vigour. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
and, agni, having scattered all assailants, bring to us the possessions of our foemen.
million, and a hundred hundred thousand million; may these bricks, o agni, be for me milch cows,
in might, o indu, with thy streams flow for the banquet of the gods:
may harmony be established by removing what is dreadful. may harmony be established by removing what is
his truth is the delight that in this chamber the men of old and recent times have tasted.
agni, the pure; in that he offers to agni, the purifying, thereby he bestows health upon him; in that (he
7 his help hath made him cheerer in the battle, the folk have made him guardian of their comfort.
d o upabhrt, come hither, the god savitr summons thee for the sacrifice
l thou art a piler; in the manner of angiras be firm with that deity.
20 like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing to the gain of riches,
8 may the dames, wives of gods, enjoy our presents, rat, asvini, agnayi, and indrani.
form of light; verily they place light before them, to reveal the world of heaven. there is a prsthva
let not the man who plots against us in the night, nor any foe prevail o'er us.
agni vaiçvanara is the year; verily he eats what the year has made sweet; those two do not wipe (their
mountains,when heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm and breaks the strong in pieces.
pavamana cups are drawn off, but these are not drawn off by him, the wooden vessel, the stirring-vessel,
do not, thou that hast been dug with the spade, cause injury!
pays reverence by night, he overcomes the darkness by light. 'should reverence be paid to the fire or
fragrance of the healing bdellium, diseases flee in every direction, as antelopes and as horses run.
5 o indra-varuna, as ye created all these creatures of the world by your surpassing might,
tenth day, the avivakya, produces overmuch. those who are outside as spectators should point out
says. mitra is the auspicious one of the gods; verily with his help he binds her by the foot. 'may pusan
samans are limited, and the yajuses are limited, but of the brahman there is no end, and that he should
(cup); verily he hides the cattle from rudra, and causes the cattle to find support in the plants .
loud neighs the tawny steed when started, settling deep in the wooden vessel while they cleanse
7 let not the oppressor with this dread, through anger swallow me up, for i am thine, o atri.
7 generate songs even as of old, give car unto the singer's call.
10 he then who shone together with his parents remembered prsni's fair and secret treasure,
5 o indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were thineno, not a thousand suns could match thee at thy birth, not both the worlds, o thunderer.
28 sole lord in beauty meet for praise, o vayu, dropping fatness down,
b thou art taken with a support; to indra of the sodaçin thee! this is thy birthplace; to indra of the
settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering and most gladdening drink for indra!
the welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with might this prayer to win the asvins,
svasti, he offers to agni and soma. agni and soma indeed are the eyes of the sacrificer; verily he sees
she stayed not for a herald to conduct her: thus is the kingdom of a ruler guarded.
may we, addressing prayer to you, ye mighty, speak with brave sons about us to. the synod.
11 when a man's daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, knowing, will be wroth with her for blindness?
whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the pavamana hymns,
they bear around him whose long flames are pointed, fulgent among mankind with native splendour.
7 thou, agni, knower of men's works, hast sent us good food in constant course for our subsistence:
11 let us serve agni with our hymns, disposer, fed on ox and cow,
leaves', he says; therefore plants produce fruit. 'this germ of yours, of due season, hath sat him in his
ukkhishta, the father of the generator, the grandson of the spirit (asu), the primal ancestor (grandfather), the
let these speak loudly forth; let us speak out aloud: to the loud speaking pressing-stones address
hail! like heavenly light, the light; hail! like heavenly light, the sun; hail!'
indra departs with his power, varuna seizes him with varuna's noose, who is seized by evil; for him
we shall associate with the generous, the kind, and the learned.
propagated', he saw this (fire) in the pan, he bore it for a year, then was he propagated. therefore for a
that have strength; satiate them, and then shall ye overcome the asuras.' they said, 'name (them).' he
3 thou very mighty one, whose hands by virtue of thy greatness grasp,
bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize thou their bodies, and depart, o agha!
8 i point not out to you a man who strikes the pious, or reviles:
6 thou with thy wisdom, power, and works of wonder, hast stored the ripe milk in the raw cows' udders
manner of angiras; may the all-gods, common to all men, fill thee with the anustubh metre, in the
6 we call on you for aid by night, on you for succour in the day,
thereby he frees himself from varuna's noose . 'i have drawn thee', he says, for he draws him. 'be
prospers with the prosperity with which manu prospered. from what is unsupported in the sacrifice the
2 o asuras, o varuna and mitra, this hymn to you, like food, anew i offer.
n to him that sitteth in man, hail! to him that sitteth in the waters, hail! to him that sitteth in the
2 most wise is he who, forcing doors of panis, brought the bright sun to us who feedeth many.
7 come the two first celestial sweet-voiced hotars, arranging sacrifice for man to worship
singing in his mind that foundation he draws; verily he becomes possessed of a foundation. if the
thou, indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steeds and kine:
2 in aspect he is like the sun; he runneth forward to the lakes,
away from the sacrifice , he followed the adityas; they took refuge in (the cups) for two deities, them
sacrifice of him who knows thus is in order at the beginning. if a man sacrifices after announcing the
speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the water croak, as frogs from out the water
here is my varana-amulet, a bull that destroys the rivals: with it do thou close in upon thy enemies, crush them
enemy-dispelling (oblation) is to be offered subsequently at the full moon, the sacrificer by it drives
lord! we bring to you our adoration! lead us through the righteous path to riches.
indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid
let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to injure us.
his speech; thrice he utters 'him'; verily thus he chooses the udgatrs; the agrayana is prajapati; in that
10 in the sheep's wool hath soma pavamana flowed, while they cleanse him, like a playful infant,
b this one on the right, the all-worker; his, the all-worker's, mind; summer born of mind; the tristubh
in many a place did he deposit the germ of the waters.
nor these the waters that flow on for ever, nor hills, abaters of the wind's wild fury.
6 for, through the swift gods' loving help, in many an autumn, maruts, we
food, (serving) for prosperity. morning and evening were those of the asuras, without a middle, a
20 this our.effectual sacrifice, reaching the sky, shall heaven and earth
2 agni hath waxen mighty by laudations, to be adored with hymns of those who praise him.
atmosphere, having strengthened thyself with their brahma and payas (spiritual and physical essence) do thou
this is our highest bond: i am his offspring. how many others came ere i succeeded?
that hath so heightened him the great, the wide to do his mighty work. so did the god attend the god, true indu
4 our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to the wells.
while uttering indra's name the seers bestowed (upon men) the gangida, which the gods in the beginning had
we call on aditi, adityas, and the gods, those who are on the earth, in waters, and in heaven.
he, clothed in light, hath shone most fair to look on, wealthy in boons, as a home shines with riches.
the somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is distined,
thou givest wealth and treasure to the worshipper. let us not in thy friendship, agni, suffer harm.
smites away the raksases from the whole extent of the sacrifice; he pours butter transversely; therefore
prepared.--push these (soma-) shoots upon this red skin; the press-stone shall purify them as the washer-man
earth. upon the two most lovely places both he walks hither and away, knowing (the way).
this herb shall make thee so very full of lusty strength, that thou shalt, when thou art excited, exhale
with five (sets of) dust; they make up ten, the viraj has ten syllables, the viraj is food; verily he finds
he who with fame extends through all existence hears words which i, his faithful servant, utter.
.138sukta 138 – charm for depriving a man of his virility
with loving kindness of the gods to whom sacrifice is made.
sterile (without giving me to the brahmans), he shall be bound in the fetters of death!'
the new and the full moon (sacrifices) are the chariot of the gods. he, who having offered the new and
the theologians say, 'he indeed would really sacrifice, who having sacrificed with the agnistoma
d when on him as on a steed in swift movements,
may indra-vigour fill thee full, as surya fills mid-air with rays
this herb, born of honey, dripping honey, sweet as honey, honied, is the remedy for injuries; moreover it
syllables won the thirteenfold stoma; the rudras with fourteen syllables won the fourteenfold stoma;
11 one of my flanks is in the sky; i let the other trail below:
this amulet has a golden wreath, bestows faith and sacrifice and might; in our house as a guest it shall dwell!
porridge, that has been presented and deposited by us, in three divisions has reached the thrte heavens.
raining it down, o maghavan, day after day, thou gainest thy surpassing might.
the princes evermore behold that loftiest place of vishnu, like
grant me, nasatyas, riches in abundance, wealth famous and accompanied with children.
3 faithful art thou, these thou defiest, indra; thou art the rbhus' lord, heroic, victor.
as the seed grows in the field, in the furrow drawn by the ploughshare, thus in me offspring, cattle, and every
seeds, soma is it ; verily straightway he wins soma drinking. he who desires cattle should offer a
6 aditi guard our herd by day, aditi, free from guile, by night,
the man of royal caste incurs not the anger of (her), his mother.
share to the gods, secretly to the asuras. men promise openly the share to every one; if they promise any
pressed, for once he prospered thereby. he draws with the mind, for prajapati is mind as it were; (verily
o much-invoked, thou hast subdued thy foemen: thy might is loftiest; here display thy bounty.
rich in heroes, he shall, when implored, not abandon me, nor may i abandon thee: abundance in cattle and
before and after. hospitality is the head of the sacrifice, the sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds,
arka has its name. he offers with a leaf of the arka, to unite it with its birthplace. he offers standing
waters strive to drag away his fire, verily it remains unmoved. he puts down the aditya bricks; it is the
o king, vaisvanara, bestow thou on us excellent treasures worthy to belonged fo r.
7 o indra, lover of the song, may these quick somas enter thee:
he who desires cattle should sacrifice with the çitra (offering); çitra is this (earth); in that in this (earth)
even by the side of the sun it is bright ,
7 you, bards and singers at men's sacrifices, both filled with wisdom, i incline to worship.
life, with fair life', he says; verily seizing the gods he rises up. 'fare along the wide atmosphere', he
playing, not playing, he gold-hued and toothless, hath cut his food up as the knife a victim.
him may the sovran varuna deliver, wise, ne'er deccived, loosen the bonds that bind him.
3 when indra and the angirases desired it, sarama found provision for her offipring.
2 o indra-varuna, mighty and very rich one of you is called monarch and one autocrat.
and well-fed die too. the wealth of the rich man who generously gives, does not run out. on the other
inflamed and keen, refulgent in our gatherings, he lifts our hymn on high clad in his radiant hues.
9 for, agni, lord of sacrifice and messenger of men art thou:
4 bright agni, they who deck their songs for thee have horses as their meed.
10 yea, to the dear one's seat in homes of heaven and earth the bay steeds' lord hath whinnied like a
6 the priests with ladles lifted up, worshipping here with holy thought,
serves) for support. if he desire of a man, 'may i deprive him of brilliance, of the deities, of power', he
to mitra and varuna (he offers) clotted curds; the sacrificial fee is a cow. to brhaspati (he offers) an
eager to laud you, we with songs invoke you, bearing sacred food,
places on the agnidh's altar the pressing-stones, the cups for vayu, and the wooden trough, for they take
10 so seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief lover of the song,
a firm is thy dwelling, thy place of birth, firm art thou
2 the two exceeding wise, the sons of daksa, whom the gods ordained
other of them dies before his day. he loves to frequent the house of him whose house he burns; he
this soma hath been pressed for thee, o indra: bold one, mightiest, come!
comes. the ahavaniya is the abode of the gods, between the fires of cattle, the garhapatya of men, the
agni, with the pressing-day have i obtained; thee, o agni, with the sacrificial fees have i obtained; thee,
thine is the task of cleanser and presenter: waken us, wealth-bestower and producer.
11 this the fair name and this the lovely aspect of him the waters' son increase in secret.
e to agni, slayer of raksases, hail! to yama, savitr, varuna, brhaspati, the worshipful, the slayer of
b agni is thy yoke-fellow, o steed; i grasp thee; bear me prosperously.
bring us the wealth for which we long, o indra, that which is concealed
here for your drauglit of meath are soma juices: at this our sacrifice rejoice, ye mighty.
thus the adabhya is drawn, prospers himself, his foe is defeated. because the gods deceived the asuras
'may i be fit to drink honey'; (he fills with curds) to be curdled with hot milk, for purity. the curds are
on the back of the vault, above the light of the sky,
sides. the gods found a protector in agni; they offered to agni, the forward, a cake on eight potsherds,
even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for our bliss,
we, we the living, now behold her brightness and they come nigh who shall hereafter see her.
out with holy power and with the deities. 'breaking not, o earth, fill the regions, the quarters' , he
hence sendest thou, o sapient jatavedas, to him who serves thee treasures in succession.
indra the terrible, tamer of every man, as arya leads away the dasa at his will.
3 ye with your strength have pierced the fountains of the floods: the sun have ye brought forward as
for their broad-chested speckled deer are standing like a king's armies on the field of battle.
when, gracious, for the hymn he brings forth food and wealth, the glowing sun untroubled sends forth
4 eager to gain, we crave from him the friendly god strength confident, choiceworthy meet to be
or those of the five tribes of men, bring quickly all that help to us.
in that there is (an offering) on eleven potsherds, he bestows power upon him with the tristubh; in that
2 stay still, o maghavan, advance no farther. a draught of well-pressed soma will i give thee.
with coursers yoked by law drive hither, asvins, your car whose reins are light, laden with treasure.
i release thee unto life by means of (my) oblation, from unknown decline, and from consumption. if grâhi
'blowing after', the night; with eager', the vasus; with 'intelligence', the rudras; with 'brilliant', the
seized thee, may these gods remove her by means of their charm!
3 this day may all your water-bringers, maruts, they who impel the falling rain, approach us.
slew ahi, and sent forth the seven rivers, and opened as it were obstructed fountains.
he that refuses the sterile cow to him that knoweth thus, and gives her to others, difficult to dwell upon is for
shree krishna declares that no amount of self-effort—the study of the vedic texts, performance of ritualistic ceremonies, undertaking of severe austerities, abstinence from food, or generous acts of charity—is sufficient to bestow a vision of the cosmic form of god. this is only possible by his divine grace. this has been repeatedly stated in the vedas as well: tasya no hrāsva tasya no dhehi (yajur veda)[v24] “without being anointed in the nectar of the grace of the supreme lord, nobody can see him.” the logic behind this is very straightforward. our physical eyes are made from matter, and hence all that we can see is also material. the supreme lord is non-material—he is divine. to have a vision of his divine form we need divine eyes. when god bestows his grace upon the soul, he adds his divine power to our material eyes, and only then can we see him. one may ask that how was sanjay also able to see that cosmic form, which arjun saw by divine grace. the mahabharat states that sanjay also received by the grace of his guru, ved vyas, who was an avatār of god. before the war, the ved vyas offered his student sanjay divine vision so that he may be able to communicate the details of the war to dhritarashtra. hence, he saw the same cosmic form that arjun saw. but later, when duryodhan died, sanjay was overwhelmed with grief and lost his divine vision.
fourteen. as for ten of them, the viraj is ten-syllabled, the viraj is food; verily by the viraj they win
(verily it serves) to beat away the foe. 'along the stream of ghee, with offspring, with increase of
o soma, be thou gracious, driving off distress: thou goest, clothed in butter, to a robe of state.
17 with endless genial flow the strong hath run, purified by the waters, blent with milk.
thee, godlike one, with ears to hear, most famous, men's generations magnify with praise-songs.
6 swell, o thou bull and give those powers an impulse, e'en earth and heaven who yield their milk in
skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, impetuous as a bull that snorteth in the mead.
that iron bolt with yellow jaw smote ahi down. a thousand flames had he who bore the tawny-hued.
12 may he assist us among all the tribes, and make the envier's praise devoid of light.
with what help will he come to us, wonderful, everwaxing friend?
was the overlord. they praised with nineteen, the çudra and the arya were created, day and night were
maruts with holy song, and, goddess aditi, mighty one, to our house and home.
he drave the kine forth and cleft vala through by prayer, dispelled the darkness and displayed the light
they hasten with swift steeds easy to be controlled. their cars moved onward as they went to victory.
a thou i art connected with the maruts, thou art the force of the maruts, cleave the stream of the waters.
give food and wealth to present sacrificers, a portion, worth a thousand, of refreshment.
cement of the layers; in that he puts down the seasonal (bricks), (it is) to keep apart the layers. he puts
8 eat, indra, these oblations which approach thee: be pleased with food made ready and with soma.
when straightway on the region's farthest edge i brought the god who makes the lights to broaden and
drives away his enemies. with two verses containing the word 'strength', he accompanies the separation
men through the çukra and manthin, whole-hooved animals through the season-cups, kine through the
same. those, who knowing thus perform (the rite of) thirty-three days, are distinguished from the evil
evil be to him that prepares evil, the curse shall recoil upon him that utters curses: back do we hurl it against
may visnu, of long strides, who is our preserver, be propitious to us.
him have they stablished as the days' bright ensign. he made the mornings to be born in splendour.
2 his eyes are turned away, his head is hidden: unsated with his tongue he eats the fuel.
bring weal from heaven that men may dwell securely. may we o'ercome the foe's malign oppressions,
5 he seeks no enterprise with five or ten to aid, nor stays with him who pours no juice though
4 in whose laud thou didst joy, indra, at the great deed, o satakratu, mighty one!
b offering to the gods, i seize thee with the noose of sacred order.
live thou by the (life's) breath of them that have life, and that create life; do not die! i free thee from all evil and
e he puts on dust with a verse addressed to vaiçvanara; agni vaiçvanara is this (earth), the dust is its
him who with might of both his arms broke nine-and-ninety castles down,
d thou art the self-ruling, the northern quarter; the all-gods are thine overlords, varuna stayeth missiles
give richly, agni, to the visvamitras in rest and stir. oft have we decked thy body.
4 the new-born vrtra-slayer asked his mother, as he seized his shaft,
through me as lord of the house, mayst thou be a good lord of the house; for a hundred winters; this
29 so, as a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand have i gained,
they bear unmoved the cursing of the people, for all our wisdom comes from thee, o indra.
inspiration, expiration and inspiration depart from him whose illness is long. verily he has recourse to
9 agni shines far and wide with lofty splendour, and by his greatness makes all things apparent.
5 urged by the holy singer, sped by song, come, indra, to the prayers,
devas bhaga, aryama, and the bounteous savita have given thee to me, for you to become the ruler of
performed them; the rite of the gods succeeded, that of the asuras did not succeed. if he is desirous of
5 four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting together in the same container.
clothed in grass, be thou kindly disposed; give us, moreover, wealth along with heroes!
eye, ear, skill, might, force, strength, life, old age, breath, body, protection, guard, limbs, bones, joints,
2 producing light for all the world of creatures, god savitar hath raised aloft his banner.
vouchsafe us room that we may win strength for prosperity and wealth.
the gods came near, obedient to thy sunimons, and thus attained their rank as chief protectors.
vasu, thou most youthful god, bharata, agni, bring us wealth,
from the point (of the arrow) have i charmed away the poison, from the substance that has been smeared
the store of amrit that laid away yonder, o vata, in thine home-give us strength that we may live!
releasing them from age with a loud roar he comes, filling them with new spirit, living, unsubdued.
4 we seek to win thy friendly love, even pavamana's flowing o'er
5 the seven carry seven spears; seven are the splendours they possess,
g thou art taken with a support; agreeable to prajapati i take thee
the glittering maids send sdra forth, the glorious sisters, closeallied,
come, vasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared: rejoice thee, gracious, with our songs.
'let me come to thee'; 'there is no space here', he answered. he said to viçvakarman, 'let me come to
off the sacrifice for them; in that they won the wealth of the asuras which was to be won (védyam), that
we approach first the (god) that has dark horses, is black, sable, destructive, terrible, who casts down the car
bestow growth upon him, he grows with offspring and cattle; moreover in that he offers these oblations,
sing forth to indu, o ye men, to him who is purified,
one carries off the refuse at the set of sun. how did the parents aid their children in their task!
10 urged like a car-steed flow to strength, o soma: indu, flow onward to the throat of indra.
created agni; he being created went away from him ; he followed him with this (verse), 'he hath
born by night art thou, o plant, dark, black, sable. do thou, that art rich in colour, stain this leprosy, and the
the sage hath robed him in the sheep's wool for the banquet of the gods,
even strong birds descend not to the mortal who strives to reach them with swift blow and weapons.
in the wild joy of soma had struck off with might the head of vrtra, tyrant of the earth and heaven.
born of summer; from the tristubh the aida (saman); from the aida the antaryama (cup); from the
thou, visiting both thy mothers, aidest them as son; thou joinest close the earth and heaven.
sacrifice . 'before the uktha it should be poured down', they say, for in front one enjoys life; 'in the
agni hath looked, benevolently-minded, on the wealth-giving spring of radiant mornings.
unweariedly thou bearest up the offerer's gifts, then shinest bright among the gods.
the three days in succession mount upon the world of heaven turning away (from earth). there is a three
9 for we, like vyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, call on you:
our flood may not be stayed when urged to motion. what would the singer, calling to the rivers?
in man are nine, the navel is the tenth; verily he places the breaths in front; therefore the breaths are in
may the good lord (symbolized by our agni gârhapatya [household fire]) forgive us and guide us to perform good
9 at the o'erflowing of this steer, boldly he strode for life, and took
wherewith trisoka drove forth his recovered cows,-come hither unto us, o asvins, with those aids.
when vegetarian foods are cooked with excessive chilies, sugar, salt, etc. they become rājasic. while describing them, the word “very” can be added to all the adjectives used. thus, rājasic foods are very bitter, very sour, very salty, very hot, very pungent, very dry, full of chillies, etc. they produce ill-health, agitation, and despair. persons in the mode of passion find such foods attractive, but those in the mode of goodness find them disgusting. the purpose of eating is not to relish bliss through the palate, but to keep the body healthy and strong. as the old adage states: “eat to live; do not live to eat.” thus, the wise partake of foods that are conducive to good health, and have a peaceable impact upon the mind i.e., sāttvic foods.
up; it is liable to crush the sacrifice face to face; in that he sets up (the stake) (for tvastr) with the wives,
ask them to. tell thee what the floods are saying, what girdling rock the waters burst asunder.
i give full many a thousand to the worshipper, what time the somas and the lauds have made me glad.
these deities may i be propagated with a pair.' 'thou art the bundle, thou art gain, may i gain', he says;
this potent herb do i dig out: it draws toward me the eve, causes (love's) tears. it brings back him who has
not a translation of the original khanamanah khanitraib (ligonibus fodiens) which sayana explains by
one he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing deep within the earth's recmes.
may thy mind run after me as a calf after the cow, as water along its course!
offspring be for our enjoyment'; then was born the aditya vivasvant, men are his offspring here, among
in perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the light of heaven have sung forth indra's
for he is one who has taken the vasativaris. he takes the vasativaris; the vasativaris are cattle; verily
even as the cows who poured forth every thing for man, yea, poured forth all thing- for mankind.
8 i in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and all this spacious earth
the tristubh metre, in the manner of angiras; may the adityas fill thee with the jagati metre, in the
the juices of the juicy meet. made pure by prayer, o golden-hued, flow, indu, flow for indra's sake.
4 they have bestowed of mitra all that live, to feed, they who for evermore cause their swift drops to
k for the people, for a prop, a support i take thee.
at the outset, arjun was faced with a bewildering situation, and confused about his duty in the situation. overwhelmed with sorrow, he had sat down on his chariot, andgaveup his weapons. he had confessed that he could find no remedy to the grief that attacked his body and senses. but he now finds himself completely transformed, and announces that he is situated in knowledge and no longer perplexed. he has given himself to the will of god and shall do what shree krishna instructed him to do. this was the impact of the message of bhagavad gita upon him. however, he adds tvat prasādān mayāchyuta, meaning, “o shree krishna, it was not just your lecture, but your grace that dispelled my ignorance.”material knowledge does not require grace. we can pay the educational institute or teacher and receive knowledge in return, but spiritual knowledge can neither be purchased nor sold. it is offered through grace and received through faith and humbleness. thus, if we approach the bhagavad gita with an attitude of pride, “i am so intelligent. i will evaluate what the net worth of this message is,” we will never be able to comprehend it. our intellect will find some apparent defect in the scripture to dwell upon, and on that pretext we will reject the entire scripture as incorrect. there have been so many commentaries on the bhagavad gita and innumerable readers of the divine message in the last 5,000 years, but how many people have become enlightened like arjun? if we wish to truly receive this knowledge, we must not merely read it, but also attract shree krishna’s grace with an attitude of faith and loving surrender. then we will know the purport of the bhagavad gita by his grace.
3 indra and agni, mitra, varuna, aditi, the waters, mountains, maruts, sky, and earth and heaven,
serve as the price of soma, he would not have purchased the soma, and they would not guard the sonia
hitherward let your vigorous horses bear you: drink ye with us the well-pressed soma juices.
strength, i have taken away; moreover i have caused him to be crushed.
aditi; those of auspicious mark and hornless are for sky and earth.
16 now have we entered on the road that leads to bliss, without a foe,
have not the sages of old time, ye asvins, called you most prompt to come and stay misfortune?
v thy winged (steeds) have charged them as they are wont;
brought (something) to a superior one proclaims (it); in that he puts it down, it is as when having
stumbling, for the support of the great, he shall, as if upon the heaven, found his own light!
far as the wealthy one hath spread himself abroad, he is the sire all-visible of this progeny.
the words) 'hail to the and night!' he pours it down; verily he removes the pain of the earth by day and
aryaman save us us all those who hate us: give room and freedom to sudas, ye mighty.
saviour-plant do i invoke, that he may be exempt from injury.
g the praised of the praised art thou, may the praised milk strength for me, may the praised of the
6 come with abundant blessings, come with perfect care to succour us.
world; navel deep should he pile (it) when piling for the second time; verily with the tristubh he mounts
he will, when supplicated, bring him blessing: he hath brought all, food, strength, a happy dwelling.
protected by indra, attending to the hosts, do thou that crusheth the hearts of the enemies, quickly go!
advancing, sending forth her rays, the daughter of the sky is seen.
or let the chariot of thee that hast a thousand (steeds)
trayastrinça (stoma), for support. there is an agnistoma with the pañcadaça (stoma), to obtain
yea, blest to us for wealth and weal. this will we ponder praising strength, this ponder as we praise the
him swift we seek. for foodful booty rich in kine, brought hundredfold and thousandfold.
who ride impetuous on with rapid horses, and radiant in themselves, are lords of amrta.
20 gods, we have reached a country void of pasture the land, though spacious, was too small to hold
beast) with a spot on the forehead and horns bent forward to indra, the overcomer of enemies ; the
9 ye asvins twain, endowed with manly strength, brought forth reblia when hidden in the cave and
him grasp, o thou most youthful, with thy fuel. to the mati-seer's eye give him as booty.
4 may those most powerful steeds and chariot bring you, o asvins, hither at the break of morning.
6 mid mortal men godless have secreted the king of all who live, home of the people.
.19 sukta 19 – mystic power of the apamarga plant, against demons and sorcerers
call; in that he offers what has been ladled up four times, he delights the metres, and they delighted carry
singing his psalm, well-skilled in song, a chanter, be comes as 'twere to his friend's sister roaring.
thou, indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which were poured for help,
2 drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what thou choosest of the flowing soma.
4 with thee, o india, for ally with missile-darting heroes, may
when the stars made sakadhûma their king they bestowed good weather upon him: 'this shall be his
brhaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber.
after hearing shree krishna’s instructions to behold his form, arjun wonders where to see it. so shree krishna states that it is within the body of the supreme divine personality. there, he will see infinite universes with all their moving and non-moving entities. every entity exists in the universal form, and so do the events of the past and the future. arjun will thus be able to see the victory of the pandavas and the defeat of the kauravas as an event that is a part of the unfoldment of the cosmic plan for the universe.
3 with songs i call thee, great and wide, even as a cow to profit us,
a hundred iron fortresses confined me but forth i flew with rapid speed a falcon.
be near and taste the pleasant juice, o asvins: with food, i call you to the sacrifices.
agni with one syllable won speech; the açvins with two syllables won expiration and inspiration; visnu
what god, of those who hear, is he whose well-praised name we may record in this our sacrifice;
brick; the naturally perforated brick is yonder (sky); verily he puts down yonder (sky). he makes the
as the eagle when he flies forth presses his wings against the earth, thus do i fasten down thy mind, so that
to him, mine infant, were the waters gracious. indra, my son, rose up in conquering vigour.
thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the moons: the father bears the felly portioned out by
30 then, verify, they see the light refulgent of primeval seed,
g thou art the step of visnu, smiter of him who practiseth evil; with the jagati metre i step across the
27 o soma, o thou sage, these worlds stand ready to attest thy might:
blessing of the sacrifice. if one were to say, 'that indeed (etád u) hath been glorious, o sky and earth'
25 agni, to thee whose laws stand fast our resonant songs of praise speed forth,
good indra, make our prayer succeed, and prosper this our sacrifice.
come in one car, joy-givers! to the banquet, like the bolt binding pole and nave, come hither.
4 how is the sage extolled whom the loud singers praise? what voice, what hymn is used to laud
he be rich in cattle,' he should separate the sand, after piling the gravel; verily he pours forth for him the
3 the riteless, godless man who sleeps, o indra, his unbroken steep,may he by following his own devices die. hide from him wealth that nourishes.
with his car-steeds at once 'hath our indra guided the reins and the car of these men.
he, being purified, hath made the mornings shine, and it is he who gave the rivers room to flow.
9 lord of strength, caster of the stone, destroy the firm forts built by men,
5 bring forward, asvins, gods, to its fulfilment my never-wearied prayer that asks for riches.
therefore the cow feeds with the second half. him who knows thus these two enjoy. the oblation is a
with haste, that he may help, as the bard's cherisher. indra who findeth wealth for you.
go up to her; with 'utter', he raises (the pail); with 'we that do utter', he sits down beside her, and with
8 krsa and sayu ye protect, ye asvins twain: ye two assist the widow and the worshipper;
now in doing so they really perform in order first the agnistoma, then the ukthya, then the sodaçin,
what wealth aucathya craves of you, great helpers when ye come forward with no niggard succour.
for those who long for his approach, for those who turn away from him.
making loud clamour, soma pavamana, thou flowest when thou art effused for indra.
who in fights ever conquer evil-hearted men, who overcome the enemy.
heaven. indra and agni are the bearers of force among the gods; in that (the cup) for indra and agni is
16 still as of old, whatever rite atharvan, manus sire of all,
7 we give thee life unwasting, jatavedas, so that, employed, thou never shalt be injured.
cattle, that he may not be cut off. he attains fortune, and obtains cattle who knows thus. the wife is led
their parting and their home-return, and watcheth their approach and rest.
guide us, o much-invoked, in this our way: may we still livc and look upon the light!
b raise aloft the sacrifice; in the sky guide to the gods the prayers.
4 o indra marvellously bright, come, these libations long for thee,
share your strength', he says , for they are strength. 'ye wealthy ones, stay', he says; the wealthy ones
is performed with the saman ; to the people (falls) the blessing of what (is performed) with the rc;
23 now, son of vyasva, praise thou him who to the tenth time still is new,
(to the priests); the world of heaven is measured by a thousand; (verily it serves) for the winning of the
the curse of the rival and the curse of the kinswoman, the curse which the brahman shall utter in wrath, all that
transport us over trouble to well-being repel thou from us all assaults of mis. chief.
14 we have prepared this laud for you, o asvins, and, like the bhrgus, as a car have framed it,
may our hymns give thee great delight. display thy bounty, thunderer.
11 o vrtra-slayer, thou and i will both combine for winning spoil.
become speakers of speech, for all attain prosperity. there are the three days, jyotis, go, and ayus. the
shree krishna says that god exists inside all living beings as vaiśhvānara, meaning “fire of digestion,” which is ignited by the power of god. the bṛihadāraṇyak upaniṣhad has also stated:ayam agnir vaiśhvānaro yo ’yam antaḥ puruṣheyenedam annaṁ achyate(5.9.1)“god is the fire inside the stomach that enables living beings to digest food.”thoughthe scientific community has concluded, that the organs of the digestive systemsuch as the stomach, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, etc. secrete digestive juices enabling the digestion of food inliving beings. this revelation by god suggests that such an approach is naïve. it is god’s energy which fires up the digestive process in living beings.chaturvidham means four types and annam means food. food is categorized into four types: 1. bhojya - foods that are chewed, such as bread, chapatti, etc. 2. peya - these are mostly liquid or semi-solid foods which we have to swallow or drink, such as milk, juice, etc. 3. kośhya - foods that are sucked, such as sugarcane. 4. lehya - this includes foods that are licked, such as honey, etc.in the last few verses, shri krishna has explicated how god supports every aspect of our life. with his energy, he makes the earth habitable, nourishes all vegetation, and even ignites the gastric fire to digest our food. in the next verse, he concludes by stating that he is the master of all knowledge.
brahman priest; thou art indra, the kindly. o brahman! thou, o king, art the brahman priest; thou art
16 rapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to thejoy, bringing.your swiftly-coming help,
conquers the worlds of the gods. they make twelve; the year has twelve months; verily he delights the
the pratihâra-passages (in the sâman-songs), and their final syllables, the (soma-sacrifices called) visvagit
grant wealth to us when thou art standing upright as when reposing on this mother's bosom.
and thereby he causes rain to fall. 'the gods whose portion is in the sky', (with these words) he shakes
5 do thou, all-beautiful, purify for indra's sake the mighty juice,
in heaven and earth the kindred pair commingle. on yam! be the unbrotherly act of yama.
potsherds for agni, the giver, the largest lie should give as a mess to indra, the bestower, the smallest
6 in the third region which distils a thousand streams, may the exhaustless ones descend with
begat the fire between two stones, the spoiler in warriors' battle, he, o men, is indra.
(and also) the spooks with fourfold teeth, black teeth, testicles like a pot, bloody faces, who are inherently
verily he makes it at home. 'thy libation is bright', he says; for bright is its libation. he advances (for it)
although he deemed himself alone unequalled, another had been born e'en yet more potent.
7 indra, thy bay steeds showing forth their vigour have sent a loud cry out that droppeth fatness.
viçvavasu stole it. it was for three nights stolen; therefore after purchase the soma is kept for three
cattle, (the grains) for the yoker of bays are cattle verily they make cattle find support in cattle.
2 for worthy of obeisance, gods, are all your names, worthy of adoration and of sacrifice.
flow to us, indu, very strong, effused, with wealth of kine and, steeds,
every form', (with these words) he strokes the calf; verily he piles it up and makes it piled with cattle. he
produces the east wind, to win the rains. he makes offering to the names of the wind; the wind rules the
thing. he puts down the circular bricks; the circular bricks are these worlds; the citadels of the gods are
appease it. now, as each part is performed, the raksases seek to injure the sacrifice; 'the raksas is
indra and agni, in your deeds of might ye deck heaven's lucid realms:
41 forming the water-floods, the buffalo hath lowed, one-footed or two-footed or fourfooted, she,
the drops of soma juice, like cows who yield their milk, have flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the diety,
could not restrain it. visnu was another god; he said, 'visnu, come hither; we will grasp that by
6 which among these is eldest, and where is she through whom they fixed the rbhus' regulations?
to ghosa, living in her father's dwelling, stricken in years, ye gave a husband, asvins.
shree krishna’s words had the desired effect on arjun. looking at the armies on both sides of the battlefield, his heart sank, they were all “kurus” his relatives. the brave warrior who wanted to punish the kauravas for all their wickedness a few minutes back suddenly became fearful. comprehending the devastation this war would cause, his valor started to diminish. hence, sanjay has called him kaunteyah the son of kunti, denoting that arjun had become softhearted, similar to his mother. however, arjun was now very confused and his mind filled with questions.
5 soma, as pavamana thou, our faithful friend, making for us these real treasures, flowest on.
thou madest kutsa, atithigva, ayu, subject unto this king, the young, the mighty.
3 what was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, indra? speed through our doors to songs, for
relax that mortal's stubborn strength whose heart is bent on wickedness.
strike off, ye twain, the heads of our assailants who with man's treacherous attack approach us.
desires offspring should offer an oblation to soma and rudra; soma is the bestower of seed, agni is the
help us in battles indra, in battles where thousand spoils are gained,
6 when, laden with the holy oil, the sitster [sic] by the mother stands,
18 crying aloud they ran in all directions: one half of them will cook, and not the other.
(brahman); for the world of heaven is as it were opposite from hence. when they come thence the
to the true one, let us offer an oblation rich in ghee.
reveal (all) forms, do not hide thy own self; moreover, do thou, o thousand-eyed (plant), look the kimîdins in
tlou whom this hatchct, with an edge well whetted for great felicity, hath brought before us.
'what may i bring to thee, curds, stirred drink, or liquor?' (thus) i the wife asks her husband in the kingdom of
may they, the bright ones, make our praise-song perfect, and, when we laud them, grant us all our
potsherds; to pusan an oblation; to rudra an oblation; to agni vaiçvanara (offering) on eight potsherds;
the cow herself, when slaughtered, came down upon the vaitahavyas. who had roasted for themselves the
2 i should be fain, o lord of power, to strengthen and enrich the sage,
infolded, with these two companions of indra do i pursue the conquered (king) with my army.
he says. by that (the rc) is connected with the all-gods. 'let him choose glory that he may prosper', he
ye twain are givers both of food and riches: to win me strength and vigour i invoke you.
art (now) sound of limb, for thee sound sight, and sound life have i obtained.
asuras with the mark undermost ; if he desire of a man, 'may he become richer', he should put it
8 hirn wise and strong they glorify, the foremost champion in the fray,
he, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hath roared within the goblet of the pious.
stream of wealth is desires; verily he wins desires. if he desire of a man, 'may i separate his breaths and
21 the very trees were joyful at my coming: kine they obtained in plenty, steeds in plenty.
world, i take acceptable to indra this is thy birthplace; to indra thee!
4 to him the peerless, who is calling you to give you aid, forth flow the drops of pleasant meath.
5 resplendent agni, who was born in farthest region of the air:
most manly with these men of his who help him, dealing out wealth and gathering the treasure.
5 priest doubly born, he through his love of glory hath in his keeping all things worth the choosing,
varuna, stay thou here and be not angry; steal not our life from us, o thou wide-ruler.
down the pan and the mortar, with them the sacrificer milks the fire in yonder world.
3 make his cars hear, that he may show his vigour and may be joyful in the way he loveth.
(you are) armed with hatchets, moving like two flying (birds) with forms like the moon, attaining success
when, o brihaspati, thou didst liberate (us) from existence in yonder world of yama, (and) from hostile
6 mitra, varuna, ye whose ways are firm - a power that none deceives-,
thee that art of visnu, for the sacrifice to the gods' , he says, for he welcomes it for the sacrifice to the
avoid us, o curse, as a burning fire (avoids) a lake! strike here him that curses us, as the lightning of heaven
associate with fires, make your god agni envoy at sacrifice, best skilled in worship,
joy, mightiest indra, known and marked, sprung most from soma-draughts, wherewith
show forth that power that shall deserve the hymn of praise: destroy the evil speakers, o brhaspati.
cloud-formed are for parjanya; three goats with dewlaps are (to be offered) to indrani; three ewes are for
2 thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer vrtra, o blameless one, with heart that longed
5 yea, verily, our princes seek the asvins in pursuit of food.
the gods. as the subjects of the gods are in harmony, so he brings the human subjects into harmony.' in
4 accept our sacrifice for weal, sharers of praise! the soma shed:
cause one to sacrifice with the twelve-day (rite), to avert evil.
who was appointed as a learned brahman, -what is the sacrificer's knowledge of him?
speech from above. intermediately indeed by means of a ten-nights' (rite) did prajapati create
those who still aim their hostile darts to smite us, turn them to flight, o indra, crush and kill them.
12 firm be the fellies of your wheels, steady your horses and your cars,
9 deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round about,
drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches: drink thou thy fill of meath and pour it down, o indra.
8 car-bearer is the name of his oblation, whercon are laid his weapons and his armour.
2 i am my rivals' slayer, like indra unwounded and unhurt,
in sanskrit, all letters are formed by combining a half-letter with “a.” for example, + = (k + a = ka). hence, the letter “a” is the most important in the sanskrit alphabet. “a” is also the first vowel of the alphabet, and since the vowels are written before the consonants, “a” comes at the very beginning. although sanskrit is such an ancient language, it is highly refined and sophisticated. a common procedure in sanskrit language is to combine words to form compound words. when, in the process of making one compound word, two or more words give up their case endings, it is called samāsa, and the resulting word is called samāsa pada, or compound word. there are primarily six kinds of samāsa: 1) dwandva, 2) bahubṛihi, 3) karm dhāray, 4) tatpuruṣh, 5) dwigu, 6) avyayī bhāv. amongst these, dwandva is the best because both words remain prominent in it, while in the others, either one word becomes more prominent, or both words combine together to give the meaning of a third word. the dual word radha-krishna is an example of dwandva. shree krishna highlights it as his vibhūti. creation is a magnificent act and awesome to behold. humankind’s most sophisticated and technologically advanced inventions pale in comparison. therefore, lord krishna singles out the first-born brahma, who made the entire universe, and says that amongst creators, the creative ability of brahma best reflects the glory of god.
1 his bright rays bear him up aloft, the god who knoweth all that lives,
the bad and the good are on the same level, the fire is the light, the evening is the darkness; in that he
heaven and earth shall shriek at them, and the atmosphere, along with the divine powers! neither aider, nor
10 he, with his gods who love mankind, the wondrous, giving like varuna who works with magic,
birthplace. 'this is thy sacrifice, o lord of the sacrifice, with its, utterance of hymns and producing noble
7 mother of kings, may aditi transport us, by fair paths aryaman, beyond all hatred.
whose conquering wealth is never checked, is never checked in deeds of might.
4 thy portion is the goat: with heat consume him: let thy fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him
8 the earth's eight points his brightness hath illumined, three desert regions and the seven rivers.
5 these helped to might theyouthful one, high over all, invincible,
drink thou this soma, indra, lord of soma; drink thou the draught of noonday which thou iovest.
l the hotr hath sat him down in the place of the hoty, wise,
20 for he alone is lord of all the treasures of the earth: he speeds
indra observes this wish of his, and the rain hastens with his troop.
the warming-pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving-boards,-all these attend the charger.
he, dark-backed, manifold with varied aspect, hath made them burst forth from their food the brushwood.
to the seasons we speak, to the lords of the seasons, and to the sections of the year; to the halfyears, years,
wins food, and the holy class puts over the people. the parna is the royalty, the açvattha is the
11 swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rend and burn, o hero thunder-armed:
from all thyself, from top to toe, i drive thy malady away.
8 lords of great wealth, manifold is your bounty: ye filled our cow with food that never faileth.
4 conquering bands upon the warrior waited: they recognized great light from out the darkness.
7 when as chief priest for santanu, devapi, chosen for hotar's duty, prayed beseeching,
may we who have sung hymns to thee have thee for envoy in each house. bring food to those who sing
o indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge us:
6 o sovran of the forest, as the wind blows soft in front of thee,
with those who come at dawn let mitra, aryaman sit on the grass at sacrifice.
8 hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards: these, thunderer, now we crave of thee.
garhapatya fire is piled up; for yonder world the ahavaniya. if he were to cast it on-the garhapatya fire,
gather up wondrous wealth, o indra, daily. loud may we speak, with heroes, in assembly.
21 red-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its lovely breast,
5 flow on thy way, most active, thou. fill full the mighty heavens and earth,
respectfully; they said, 'let us choose a boon; do thou associate equally with us.' for him they
hither shall come the vrtra-slayer indra, ruler of men, as strongest of the heroes.
uniting with a body be thou welcome, dear to the gods in their sublimest birthplace.
2 like-coloured, various-hued, or single-coloured, whose names through sacrifice are known to agni,
and omnipresent lord. those immature people who live in sloth do not receive your blessing.
with whom we will incite the child of waters whom vigorous course swift as thought bring hither.
to say that formula, the sacrificer would be without offspring or cattle. 'with offspring, with increase of
4 with three-fourths purusa went up: onefourth of him again was here.
flame, the people must observe, tile people that he speed them on.
b thou art taken with a support; to indra with the maruts thee!
b make thy comrades to swell with wealth and skill; with good fortune
9 his yellow-coloured jaws, like ladles move apart, what time, for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted
giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war, be thou our great encourager. let the
friend, much-invoked! art thou with thy dear rbhus: fashion ye this our hymn for our advantage.
5 these offerings have ye made with adoration: say this, sarasvati, and accept our praises;
we know the nature of thy mind. verity thou wilt give us naught.
11 indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy fearful roar,
stir up (the grains) as they settle at the bottom: let them mingle their inmost parts with the waters! the water
8 highest and lowest, men who stand between diem, going, returning, dwelling in contentment,
21 o waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm,
the earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and maghavan, madest bright thy brother's
3 the heaven with streams of golden hue, earth with her tints of green and goldthe golden pair yield indra plenteous nourishment: between them moves the golden one.
e this above, bringing riches; the leaders of his host and bands tarksya and aristamemi, and urvaçi and
24 asvins, ye raised, like soma in a ladle rebha, who for ten days and ten nights, fettered.
7 that we may worship, with your hail to agni! with sacrificial cakes and fat oblations,
praised with twenty-five, wild cattle were created, vayu was the overlord. they praised with twentyseven, sky and earth went apart, the vasus, rudras, and adityas followed their example, theirs was
he gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, when through their glory they-found the god's
round two girdles, therefore one man wins two wives; in that he does not wind one girdle round two
to the bull that slays the enemy, to kâma, do i render tribute with ghee, oblation, and (sacrificial) melted butter.
18 for these, the bards and singers, have cried out to thee with prayer, to gain the sacrifice.
with indra; he buys (it) with a draught ox, the draught ox is the bearer; verily by the bearer he buys the
cattle ; verily he wins various cattle; variety is seen in his house for whom these are put down, and
from you two came the gifts in days aforetime which trasadasyu granted to the purus.
these our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meath: dvink thereof and find them pleasant.
not?' now the beast is led to death; if he were to grasp hold of it, the sacrificer would be likely to die. or
gleaming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, after your wont ye whirl about your weapons.
earth', he says; verily with them he encircles him on both sides. he puts it down to the east,' to attain the
the gladdening draughts and wisdom have approached you: send ye us riches with good store of
summers. may i remain pure and sinless a hundred summers. yes, may i achieve all of this for even more than
2 whoso to thee, the mighty, brings oblation, pure soma unto thee, pure-drinking vayu,
unbarred the firm doors for the kine of morning, and, with the angirases, set free the cattle.
so come to us with most auspicious favour, and give us health and strength without a trouble.
your radiant chariot-whither goes it on its way?-who decks it for you, heroes, for its happy course,
when with pure hands the prudent energetic priest hath with the stones pressed out the soma rich in
where hath the hymn with reverence, like an envoy, found both fair gods to-day, invoked of manyhymn that hath brought the two nasatyas hither? to this man's thought be ye, both gods, most
2 varuna cut the channels for thy forward course, o sindhu, when thou rannest on to win the race.
there stand the three steers, splendid in their brightness, who fill the three world-bowls with genial
reply, for so the all-gods won that as their share.' or rather he should reply, 'indra, for it was in healing
12 slay enemies, animate men whom ye befriend; bestow upon us progeny and aff luence.
the kings who kept their promises restored the brahman's wedded wife,
so may the twain who work with newest succours bring yoked teams hitherward to us and riches.
2 we will invoke strong, early-conquering bhaga, the son of aditi, the great supporter:
let these life-fostering waters flow attended by the marut host, lauding thine own imperial sway.
with them together let the vrtra-slayer drink in his home the worshipper's libation.
praised with our homage even as atri praised thee, o agni, be the guardian of our bodies.
in the udder of the sun maiden, in the lap of aditi,
of the after-shoots of rice, for it is the deity of him who is low in rank; (verily it serves) for prosperity.
7 indra, be firm: a fort art thou. to thine appointed place proceeds
to you they bring their hymns with their collected thought, while ye with earnest soul come to us
mūḍha grāheṇāt refers to people with confused notions or ideas, who in the name of austerity, heedlessly torture themselves or even injure others without any respect for the teachings of the scriptures or the limits of the body. such austerities accomplish nothing positive. they are performed in bodily consciousness and only serve to propagate the grossness of the personality.
3 bright god, whose look is free from stain like surya's, thou, swift, what time thou earnestly desirest,
10 yea, strong one! tvastar turned for thee, the mighty, the bolt with thousand spikes and hundred
2 drink thou of this whereof at birth, o indra, thou drankest, mighty one for power and rapture.
2 so, too, like charioteers are they, mitra and sapient varuna,
enrich us, master of the house: thou art the giver of our wealth.
and, by refulgent light, heaven and the waters. the gods possessed the wealth. bestowing agni.
most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, fierce and exceeding strong, stalwart and full of
the sacrifice. (he measures) five times in silence . they make up ten. the viraj has ten syllables, the
13 he who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessed, to the worshipper,
5 no sorrow, no distress from any side, no foes, no creatures double-tongued have overcome the
hither their van: do thou, o anumati, hold them in place after they have arrived!
verily no offering would be made to vastospati . the right (animal) is yoked, the left not yoked, and
missiles from thee; may the threefold stoma support thee on earth, may the ajya hymn establish thee in
we will attend the heavenly one, the thousand-footed, red of hue, matchless, who blesses where he
7 hear thou syavagva while he pours to thee, as erst thou heardest atri when he wrought his holy rites.
distance, i ween, has been fetched the very remedy for jealousy.
10 far be thy dart that killeth men or cattle: thy bliss be with us, o thou lord of heroes.
holy power he quickens the kingly power, and by the kingly power the holy power; therefore a brahman
he says; verily he removes the pain from the vital airs. from the vital airs the pain enters the earth; (with
he, being cleansed, the strengthener and increaser, bountiful soma helped us his lustre,
t on the impulse of the god savitr wise ones perform the rite.
9 ever by us perform thy most heroic, thine highest, best victorious deeds, o victor.
'he shall prosper who shall pile me again hence.' the gods piled him; then they prospered; in that they
reverence be to yama, reverence to death; reverence to the fathers and to those that lead (to them) [death's
cake on eight potsherds to agni, the strong; verily he has recourse to agni, the strong, with his own
not for an ample price dost thou, stone-caster! give thyself away,
3 thou, hero, winner of the spoil, urgest to speed the car of man.
should be elevated between the ahavaniya fire and the oblation holder , between the oblation-holder
d thou art the dust of agni, the leader of the gods;
8 with your bellies full of the soma, like two saucepans, preservers of wealth, destroyers of enemies.
whereby the holy ones created for the god the light divine that ever wakes.
5 to waters with the stones they drive thee tawny-hued, most rich in sweets,
accept, as men accept a true-born infant, my laud, o agni nobly born in body.
lot not the friend of such as thou come to harm.
do thou, most youthful god, protect the men who offer, hear their songs,
8 of wealth and homes of men thou art the ruler, and opener of the stable of the cattle.
5 i am the conqueror, and thou, thou also act victorious:
in his swift flight the red dawns borne by horses refresh their bodies in the home of order.
cow, terrible in the house of him that refuses to give her.
to the gods. 'agni the hotr' , he says; agni is the hotr of the gods; him he chooses who is the hotr of
strengthened by our charm, slay them: slay their (brood), o agni, piercing them a hundredfold!
thou by thy greatness art the gods' high priest, divine, far-spread unconquerable light.
the juices that exhilarate are mingled. injure us not, but come with happy fortune.
shree krishna begins answering arjun’s questions here, and continues till the end of the chapter. each fragment is naturally drawn towards its whole; just as a piece of stone is drawn by the force of gravitation towards the earth. the individual soul is a fragment of god, who is infinite bliss. hence, the soul is a fragment of the ocean of infinite bliss, and it experiences the natural urge for bliss. when it strives to relish the bliss of the soul from god, it is called “divine love.” but when, in ignorance of its spiritual nature, it thinks of itself as the body, and seeks to relish the bliss of the body from the world, it is called “lust.”this world has been called mṛiga tṛiṣhṇā in the scriptures, meaning “like the mirage seen by the deer.” the sun rays reflecting on the hot desert sand create an illusion of water for the deer. it thinks there is water ahead of it and runs to quench its thirst. but the more it runs toward the water, the more the mirage fades away. its dull intellect cannot recognize that it is running after an illusion. the unfortunate deer keeps chasing the illusory water and dies of exhaustion on the desert sand. similarly, the material energy maya too creates an illusion of happiness, and we run after that illusory happiness in the hope of quenching the thirst of our senses. but no matter how much we try, happiness keeps fading further away from us. the garuḍ purāṇ states:chakradharo ’pi suratvaṁ suratvalābhe sakalasurapatitvambhavtirum surapatirūrdhvagatitvaṁ tathāpi nanivartate tṛiṣhṇā (2.12.14) [v47]“a king wishes to be the emperor of the whole world; the emperor aspires to be a celestial god; a celestial god seeks to be indra, the king of heaven; and indra desires to be brahma, the secondary creator. yet the thirst for material enjoyment does not get satiated.”but when one learns to turn the mind away from material allurements and renounces the desires of the senses, such a person comes in touch with the inner bliss of the soul and becomes transcendentally situated. the kaṭhopaniṣhad goes to the extent of saying that one who has renounced desires becomes like god:yadā sarve pramuchyante kāmā ye ’sya hṛidi śhritaḥatha martyo ’mṛito bhavatyatra brahma samaśhnute (2.3.14)[v48]“when one eliminates all selfish desires from the heart, then the materially fettered jīvātmā (soul) attains freedom from birth and death, and becomes godlike in virtue.” shree krishna states in the above verse that a transcendentally situated person is one who has given up selfish desires and cravings of the senses, and is satisfied in the self.
instigation of god savitr', he says, for instigation. agni went away from the gods, he entered the reed; he
he that plans to harm thee with sorceries, with (unholy) consecrations and sacrifices--him beat thou back, o
5 these men have led about the cow, have duly carried agni round,
5 pierce through the yatudhana's skin, o agni; let the destroying dart with fire consume him.
are in me.' the cow brought the (brilliance); therefore they feed off both things that are in the cow; ghee
11 after the lore of ancient time i make, like kanva, beauteous songs,
when the intellect is dulled under the effect of tamo guṇa, it clings to a fragmental concept as if it were the complete truth. people with such views often become fanatic about what they perceive to be the absolute truth. their understanding is usually not even rational, nor grounded in the scriptures or in reality, and yet they zealously desire to impose their beliefs on others. the history of humankind has repeatedly seen religious zealots who imagine themselves as self-appointed champions of god and defenders of faith. they fanatically proselytize and find a few followers with the same kind of intellect, creating the phenomenon of the blind leading the blind. however, in the name of serving god and religion, they create disruption in society and obstruct its harmonious growth.
6 to this our worship may all dawns incline them, and come to the pure place like dadhikravan.
4 he who made all that lives, who passes all in might, who orders service to the gods,
thy forest animals, the wild animals homed in the woods, the man-eating lions, and tigers that roam; the ula,
make the carts move along with them; verily whatever is his he goes with it to the world of heaven. he
7 set agni jatavedas down, the bearer of our sacred gifts,
low without fail. 'let us pay homage to thee in thy highest birth, o agni ', (with these words) he takes
accepting these our songs, for our wellbeing come to us on your chariot treasure-laden.
2 sons of the sea, mighty to save discoverers of riches, ye
vrtra. the gods having slain vrtra said to agni and soma, 'bear the offering for us.' they said, 'we two
11 when, bringing back the vanished strength, i hold these herbs within my hand,
(the spell) that has been prepared by a sadra, prepared by a râga, prepared by a woman, prepared by
in the preceding chapter, shree krishna spoke of the differences between the divine and demoniac natures, to help arjun understand the virtues that should be cultivated and personality traits that should be eradicated. at the end of the chapter, he stated that one who disregards the injunctions of the scriptures, and instead foolishly follows the impulses of the body and the whims of the mind, will not achieve perfection, happiness, or freedom from the cycle of life and death. he thus recommended that people follow the guidance of the scriptures and act accordingly. this instruction led to the present question. arjun desires to know the nature of the faith of those who worship without reference to the vedic scriptures. in particular, he wishes to understand the answer in terms of the three modes of material nature.
he works among the gods, he works in hero strength, yea, also in the praise of men.
l i pour the libation over those which slay the raksas, which slay the spell, and which are of visnu.
of cattle. 'the wives of the gods, agni, the lord of the house, are the pair of the sacrifice; by sacrifice to
convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy thoughts ourhymns of praise and worship.
45 o agni of the bharatas, blaze high with everlasting might,
this divine tree, the varana, shall shut out (vârayâtai). the gods, too, have shut out (avîvaran) the disease that
enter, o in-breathing and out-breathing, like two bulls into a stable: this person shall here flourish, an
may all in whom rest splendour and great riches obtain refreshment in these sacrifices.
14 while here he dwelleth in sublimest station, resplendent with the rays that never perish,
mouth of the chariot for him who desires force; the rastrabhrts are force, the chariot is force; verily by
3 those asvins i invoke who work marvels, brought hither to receive,
where, indra-varuna, is now that glory wherewith ye brought support to those who loved you?
15 when in the time of night, in khela's battle, a leg was severed like a wild bird's pinion,
soma of tvastr; he went to pieces on all sides ; he found no stay in himself; he saw these cakes ,as an
10 indra we seek to give us help, from here, from heaven above the earth,
in thee, through thy great might, the gods are joyful: the roots of trees hast thou directed upward.
he shall go to the three distances, he shall go beyond the five peoples; he shall go beyond the three ethers,
so mayst thou lead us on, o god, to comfort. may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
6 leeches are ye with medicines to heal us, and charioteers are ye with skill in driving.
prosperous. he who has been expelled or is being expelled should offer an oblation to the adityas, the
victoriousness and might. there is a jyotistoma atiratra, for the revealing of the world of heaven. there
n homage to the wholly covered, to the running, to the lord of warriors homage!
thee.' 'in what way wilt thou come to me? ' 'by the regional (bricks)', he replied. he came with the
14 o full of coolness, thou cool plant, full of fresh moisture, freshening herb,
on all sides in (a place) not encircled; verily he becomes without cattle . if he desire of a man, 'may
foe in sacrificing gains the power and strength of him who sacrifices not; when his foe is sacrificing he
which as a magic energy seeking waters spreads even to theimmeasurable middle region's cloud?
they conquered the earth, the gayatri metre; for eight the rudras, they conquered the atmosphere, the
the men, the pressing-stones, the cows, the waters have made this soma ready for thy drinking.
o asura, disclose thou and make visible the cow's beloved home to the bright golden sun.
purify themselves with butter; verily he produces whatever splendour exists. 'too much splendour is
thence to the worshipper he giveth riches: may he enrich us also when we laud him.
the thief that approacheth to-day, crushed to pieces he goeth away. where the paths are precipitate he shall
7 lord of bay steeds, at dawn thejuice thou drankest: thine, only thine, is the noonday libation.
take hold by the hand and lead away the spell back to him that prepares it! place it in his very presence, so
thou art the great quarter, the lady paramount by name; of thee as such brhaspati is overlord, the white,
4 he shone and caused to shme the worlds that shone not. by law he lighted up the host of mornings.
3 1, looking to the guest of other lineage, have founded many a rule of law and order.
were made to swell; for him who knows thus the quarters are made to swell. one knows prajapati,
7 may we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juice thou givest, like ancestral riches.
29, this amulet the gods shall give me unto prosperity, the mighty amulet that strengthens sovereignty and injures
4 to him shall agni bharata give shelter: long shall he look upon the sun up-rising,
the gods did ask for the sterile cow, making the brâhmana their mouthpiece. the man that does not give
he goes to war mastering both the mansions: to him both portions of the world are gracious.
let not our household gear be found defective. sharpen us with thy penetrating splendour.
8 like rival wives on every side enclosing ribs oppress me sore.
2 far be from us, o maruts, ye free givers, your impetuous shaft;
where now is surya, where is one to tell us to what celestial sphere his ray hath wandered?
will up to birth, for that was what they chose as a boon. they took a third of his guilt, it became (a
f thou art the strength of the angirases, soft as wool; grant me strength, guard me, harm me not.
share; verily he makes him attain prosperity; he prospers. he who desires radiance should offer a cake
the neuralgia that is in the limbs, that is in the ears and in the eyes-we tear them out, the neuralgia, the
with power and strength, o mighty god, approach us: be the augmenter, indra, of these riches;
5 the young and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered praise:
7 that lofty indra-power of thine, thy strength and thine intelligence,
5 he found the wavy sea of brilliant colours in forefront of the dawns who dwell in brightness.
brought forth in front . the altars are the breaths; if the adhvaryu were to go past the altars to the
e thou art the past, the future by name, in the lordship of the pitrs, expugnate the waters and the plants.
6 as, heroes, in the olden time the rsis called you to their aid,
9 among all rsis, indra, old and recent, who have engendered hymns as sacred singers,
the moon. you are farther than the waters have swept and hotter than fire. o love, you are greater than all.
as kinsman think thou of some fresh assistance; good friend, give strength and life to those who
maghavan is our helper, our protector, giver of spoil and wealth to make us famous.
5 he who brings guerdon comes as first invited: chief of the hamlet comes the guerdon-bearer.
3 the housewife goddess, aditi, and sindhu, the goddess svasti i implore for friendship:
haste to us, lord of bays; be not ungracious: visit us, lover of gold-hued oblation.
agni of divodasa, god, comes forth like indra in his might.
take your place, ye who know your proper station: be near, be very near unto our soma.
dwelling enveloped deep within the waters, him who checked heaven and stayed the floods from
agni vaisvanara, born in course of order, the messenger of earth, the head of heaven,
bright, checkless, as it were upon the atvins' path, lie passeth by the stones and burneth up the grass.
i praise this god, parent of heaven and earth, exceeding wise, possessed of real energy, giver of treasure,
2 give us not as a prey to death, to be destroyed by thee in wrath,
2 thus be ye lauded, ye destroyers of the foe, ye three-and-thirty deities,
5 whoso, with worship serves mitra and varuiia, him guard ye carefully, uninjured, from distress, guard
12 from you, twain maghavans, all truth proceedeth: even the waters break not your commandment.
his lustre, joying in its own bright splendour, maketh dear glories in the lowest region.
16 as in the days of old our ancient fathers, speeding the work of holy worship, agni,
12 navagvas and dasgvas with libations of soma juice sing hymns of praise to indra.
wherever thou hast been bitten, wherever thou hast been sucked, from there do we exorcise for thee the
8 may both worlds bless subandhu, young mothers of everlasting law.
4 well-robed, enveloped he is come, the youthful: springing to life his glory waxeth greater.
for ayu's sake i caused veta to bend and bow, and into savya's hand delivered padgrbhi.
what wish of sarama hath brought her hither? the path leads far away to distant places.
when, aiding arjuneya, thou subduedst to him both kuyava and the dasa susna.
these men's great bounty hath been manifested, and the whole world of life set free from darkness.
clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light, produceth forms that please us.
2 men, vasu! by the soma, with lauds call thee to the foremost place:
we dissipate a large portion of our thought power and energy in combating people whom we perceive as enemies and potentially harmful to us. the vedic scriptures say the biggest enemies—lust, anger, greed, envy, illusion, etc.—reside in our own mind. these internal enemies are even more pernicious than the outer ones. the external demons may injure us for some time, but the demons sitting within our own mind have the ability to make us live in constant wretchedness. we all know people who had everything favorable in the world, but lived miserable lives because their own mind tormented them incessantly through depression, hatred, tension, anxiety, and stress. the vedic philosophy lays great emphasis on the ramification of thoughts. illness is not only caused by viruses and bacteria, but also by the negativities we harbor in the mind. if someone accidentally throws a stone at you, it may hurt for a few minutes, but by the next day, you will probably have forgotten about it. however, if someone says something unpleasant, it may continue to agitate your mind for years. this is the immense power of the thoughts. in the buddhist scripture, the dhammapada (1.3), the buddha also expresses this truth vividly: “i have been insulted! i have been hurt! i have been beaten! i have been robbed! misery does not cease in those who harbor such thoughts. when we nourish hatred in our mind, our negative thoughts do more damage to us than the object of our hatred. it has been very sagaciously stated: “resentment is like drinking poison and hoping that the other person dies.” the problem is that most people do not even realize that their own uncontrolled mind is causing them so much harm. hence, jagadguru shree kripaluji maharaj advises: mana ko mano shatru usaki sunahu jani kachhu pyare (sadhan bhakti tattva)[v1] “dear spiritual aspirant, look on your uncontrolled mind as your enemy. do not come under its sway.” however, the same mind has the potential of becoming our best friend, if we bring it under control of the intellect, through spiritual practice. the more powerful an entity is, the greater is the danger of its misuse, and also the greater is the scope for its utilization. since the mind is such a powerful machine fitted into our bodies, it can work as a two-edged sword. thus, those who slide to demoniac levels do so because of their own mind while those who attain sublime heights also do so because of their purified minds. accordingly, franklin d. roosevelt, former president of america, expressed this very nicely: “men are not prisoners of fate, but only prisoners of their own minds.” in this verse, shree krishna enlightens arjun about the potential harm and benefits our mind can bestow upon us. in the following three verses, shree krishna describes the symptoms of one who is yog-aru?ha (advanced in yog).
me', (with this hope) is the fire piled; the gods know him. 'for what good is the fire piled?' they say.
the gods and the asuras were in conflict; the asuras sought to force them from the quarters; the gods
drops born as law prescribes, that find the light of heaven!
let the helpers help thee. deal among dear things, best among things to be sought, treasure lord of
gods! maruts! brahmanaspati! i crave with song the help that is most excellent.
17 here the arranging priests, as did atharvan, rub this agni forth,
d the north of the quarters; the autumn of the seasons; mitra and varuna the deity; prosperity the
unfold the sacrifice, upon which are set up, in front of the sacrifice, the sacrificial posts, erect and brilliant, that
how may the mind draw nigh to please thee, agni? what hymn of praise shall bring us greatest
viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up the reins like chariot-drivers.
7 they have poured out a bowl to him, to indra, full of sweet juice, for faithful is his bounty.
water; may the pot receive you! when ye have cookect this (porridge) go ye to the world of the pious (heaven)!
his bay steeds well maintain his power eternal, at one time bright and darksome at another.
14 slayer of foes, whatever aid of thine imparts the swiftest course,
3 both heaven and earth and gods who should be worshipped establish thee as priest for every
do not resort to him to whom wisdom does not resort. he puts dhatr first; verily in his mouth he places
to the strong rudra bring we these our songs of praise, to him the lord of heros with the braided
drops born as law prescribes, that find the light of heavenj
of yore, (o agni), thou wast worthy of supplication at the sacrifice; thou wast the priest in olden times, and now
the rising sun shall slay the worms, the setting sun with his rays shall slay the worms that are within the cattle!
9 to thee speeds forth my hope that craves the gift of corn, and kine and gold,
unsurmounted, the unsurmountable', he says; for that is unsurmounted and unsurmountable. 'the force
b thou art taken with a support; to indra with the maruts thee,
the gods and the asuras strove for these worlds; visnu saw this dwarf, he offered it to its own deity;
when moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely suns.
brâhmanam (brahmanical life), the highest brahma, and all the gods, together with immortality (amrita).
excellent lord, 'tis strange tome, no wish have i to sing the psalm that pajra sings.
he stays apart the two confronting bowls; he sings lauds in the potent soma's joy when he hath drunk.
asvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient car which he who worships must invoke at eve and dawn.
8 eternal law hath varied food that strengthens; thought of eternal law, removes transgressions.
the tawny bull hath bellowed, fair as mighty mitra to behold: he gleams and flashes with the sun.
all these our doings shall delight the singer. let nirrti depart to distant places.
7 praise agni in the sacrifice, the sage whose ways are ever true,
they who beheld the friend beside the living were cast aside by thee as they rode onward.
wins strength. it is level with his mouth; verily from the mouth (downwards) he wins strength for him.
5 the steed of vata, vayu's friend, the muni, by the gods impelled,
the aditya (cup) is cattle; he-draws after covering (the cup); verily he draws securing cattle for him.
bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and joy, immortals!
9 free for the maruts is the earth with sloping ways, free for the rushing ones is heaven with steep
'with thy top graze not the sky, with thy middle harm not the atmosphere', he says; verily he makes it
may you have the harmony of mind and heart. may the lord cause you to pursue common goals.
aloft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth: agni, thou speedest to the gods as envoy.
verily thereby he makes (it) for the gods; 'homage', he says; verily thereby he makes (it) for the pitrs; so
enough for even a single night (rite). in the preceding days they perform the brhat and the rathantara.
who cast down varcin's sons, a hundred thousand,-to him, to indra, offer ye the soma.
possessed of power. it is ruddy and has eyebrows; that is the form of indra; (verily it serves) for
may we not conflict with rudra, the archer with the dark crest, the thousand-eyed, powerful one, the slayer of
furthers with his own holy works his offspring, and ever passes those whose flames ascend not.
a mother never thinks of deserting her newborn helpless child who is entirely dependent upon her. the supreme and eternal mother of the soul is god. in this verse, god offers motherly assurance to souls who surrender exclusively to him. the words used are vahāmi aham, meaning “i personally carry the burden of maintaining my devotees,” just as a married man carries the burden of maintaining his wife and children. god promises two things. the first is yog—he bestows his devotees the spiritual assets they do not possess. the second is kṣhem—he protects the spiritual assets that his devotees already possess.however, the condition he has placed for this is exclusive surrender. this can again be understood through the same analogy of the mother and child. a newborn baby is fully dependent upon its mother, who takes care of the baby’s welfare entirely. the baby simply cries whenever it needs anything; the mother cleans it, feeds it, bathes it, etc. but when the baby becomes a five-year old child, it begins doing some actions for itself. to that extent the mother reduces her responsibilities. and when the same child becomes a youth and assumes all responsibilities, the mother relinquishes her responsibilities further. now if the father comes home and asks, “where is our son?” the mother replies, “he has not returned home after school. he must have gone for a movie with his friends.” her attitude is now more neutral toward him. but when the same boy was a five-year old, and had gotten delayed by ten minutes in returning home from school, both the mother and father would begin worrying, “what has happened? he is a small child. let’s hope he has not met with an accident. let us phone the school and find out.”in this way, as the boy keeps assuming more responsibilities, his mother keeps relinquishing her responsibilities. god’s law is exactly the same. when we act from our independent will, thinking that we are the doers of our actions, and depend upon our own prowess and abilities, god does not bestow his grace. he merely notes our karmas and gives the result. when we surrender partially to him and partially depend upon material crutches, god also partially bestows his grace upon us. and when we offer ourselves exclusively to him, māmekaṁ śharaṇaṁ vraja, god bestows his complete grace and takes full responsibility, by preserving what we have and providing what we lack.
to agni i present a newer mightier hymn, i bring my words and song unto the son of strength,
we in king soma place our trust, in agni, and in varuna,
guard of all being, generating creatures, loud roared the sea as highest law commanded.
earth', he says; these deities first gathered him together; verily with them he gathers him together. 'thou
7 come in the ship of these our hymns to bear you to the hither shore
cattle followed it, it became hump backed. he who desires cattle should offer this humpbacked (one) to
support verily he places radiance in himself. there is a trinava (stoma), for conquest. there is a
he only knowing works assigns their priestly tasks. yea, lofty is the praise of savitar the god.
16 giver of kine, may we not miss thy gracious gifts: let us not rob thee of thine own.
he, pavamana, granted strength to indra: he, indu, generated strength in surya.
visnu. visnu accepted it (saying), 'let indra place power in us.' by means of the third in the sky indra
he, quivering with alarm and terrified in heart before bow-armed krsanu, holdeth fast the sweet.
2 whose way is unattainable like surya's: he in each fight is the strong vrtra-slayer,
29 to thee most oft invoked, amid the many singers' rivalry
and steeds,lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss. with brave men in the assembly may we speak
21 o pavamana, drive away the danger, whether near at hand
there he created offspring; the oblation of him whose dhruva, is made of vikankata, wood finds rest;
world of heaven. the tortoise is the intelligence of animals; in that he puts down the tortoise, animals
2 come, indra, to this gladdening drink, placed on the grass, pressed out with stones:
4 let the man thrive who travails sore, in prayer, far thee the bountiful.
8 may we invoke thee as a liberal giver thou givest us, o indra, strength and labours.
strenorth, as the sun takes away the strength of persons asleep (while it rises).
men, vasu! by the soma with lauds call thee to the foremost place.
chakra, or cycle, means an ordered series of events. the cycle from grains to rains has been described in verse 3.14. all members of this universal wheel of action perform their duties and contribute to its smooth rotation. since we also partake of the fruits of this natural cycle, we too must do our bounden duty in the chain.we humans are the only ones in this chain who have been bestowed with the ability to choose our actions by our own free will. we can thus either contribute to the harmony of the cycle or bring about discord in the smooth running of this cosmic mechanism. when the majority of the people of human society accept their responsibility to live as integral parts of the universal system, material prosperity abounds and spiritual growth is engendered. such periods become golden eras in the social and cultural history of humankind. conversely, when a major section of humankind begins to violate the universal system and rejects its responsibility as an integral part of the cosmic system, then material nature begins to punish, and peace and prosperity become scarce.the wheel of nature has been set up by god for disciplining, training, and elevating all living beings of varying levels of consciousness. shree krishna explains to arjun that those who do not perform the yajña enjoined of them become slaves of their senses and lead a sinful existence. thus, they live in vain. but persons conforming to the divine law become pure at heart and free from material contamination.
whom this arrangement is made, and he too who knows it thus. he puts down the creating (bricks);
5 with humble homage, indra, have the soma-drops flowed forth to thee,
5 in aid of abhyavartin cayamana, indra destroyed the seed of varasikha.
9 three times a hundred gods and thrice a thousand, and three times ten and nine have worshipped
5 mover of speech, we robe him with our songs as he is purified
bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libation's place
o indra, give us for our weal a triple refuge, triply strong!
15 all is prepared for your delight. we are their servants evermore,
10 this is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thou shonest forth.
whence springs the hero, powerful, skilled in action, lover of gods, adjuster of the press-stones.
the ants devour thee, pea-hens hack thee to pieces. yea, every one of you shall declare the poison of the
the friendly one seeks human generations, destroying, still new bands of evil beings.
4 through me alone all eat the food that feeds them,-each man who sees, brewhes, hears the word
as the sun is released from darkness, abandons the night, and the streaks of the dawn, thus every misery,
7 agni, these brilliant flames of thine wax like strong chargers mightily,
down the all-light (bricks); verily by them he makes these worlds full of light; verily also they support
9 those men who step not back and move not forward, nor brahmans nor preparers of libations,
kindled, most youthful one! by bharadvaja's hand, shine on us, o pure god, with wealth, shine,
throughout this veda, the title of each of the following 1028 mantras (hymns) will be the name of the
6 he, soma, like a courser in the floods invincible, made clean
37 o pusan, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the sharer of my pleasures;
whether thou art beyond the haunts of men, or whether across the river, this very herb, as if a captive bound,
bestowed life, power, and strength upon himself; he who sacrifices creates as it were offspring; then he
the amulet which brihaspati tied wearing that amulet kandramas (the moon) conquered the golden cities of
though, indra, thou art called by men from east and west, from north and soutb,
4 send thou with hymns that agni to his own abode, who rules, one sovran lord of wealth, like varuna,
2 arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this indra's n-dghty arms in war.
4 indra, song -lover, here for thee the worshipper's libation flows.
rajanya, for the rajanya is connected with the tristubh. he casts the ash into the waters; agni's place of
2 with these discomfit hosts that fight against us, and check the opponent's wrath, thyself uninjured.
the hidden pair, heaven and the earth, thou foundest, and to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure.
in whom, through his great powers, oblation-eating cows in their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk.
him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides most munificent.
from every limb make the poison start; shut it out from the heart! now the force that is in thy poison shall go
so, lord of fair dominion, friend of all men, give us splendid wealth.
the three-fold divisions of dānam, or charity, are now being described. it is an act of duty to give according to one’s capacity. the bhaviṣhya purāṇ states: dānamekaṁ kalau yuge [v5] “in the age of kali, giving in charity is the means for purification.” the ramayan states this too:pragaṭa chāri pada dharma ke kali mahuñ ek pradhānajena kena bidhi dīnheṅ dāna karai kalyāna [v6]“dharma has four basic tenets, one amongst which is the most important in the age of kali—give in charity by whatever means possible.” the act of charity bestows many benefits. it reduces the attachment of the giver toward material objects; it develops the attitude of service; it expands the heart, and fosters the sentiment of compassion for others. hence, most religious traditions follow the injunction of giving away one-tenth of one’s earnings in charity. the skandh purāṇ states:nyāyopārjita vittasya daśhamānśhena dhīmataḥkartavyo viniyogaśhcha īśhvaraprityarthameva cha [v7]“from the wealth you have earned by rightful means, take out one-tenth, and as a matter of duty, give it away in charity. dedicate your charity for the pleasure of god.” charity is classified as proper or improper, superior or inferior, according to the factors mentioned by shree krishna in this verse. when it is offered freely from the heart to worthy recipients, at the proper time, and at the appropriate place, it is bequeathed to be in the mode of goodness.
on me power may indra bestow; on me wisdom, on me offspring, on me blazing may surya bestow.
34 all this hath he accomplished, yea, indra, most gloriously renowned,
heroes of one accord brought forth and formed for kingship indra who wins the victory in all
7 when he had drunken draughts of this, indra smote down resistless foes:
6 this day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this might of thine:
14 fifteen in number, then, for me a score of bullocks they prepare,
man, who knows thus and for whom they chose his list of ancestors, prospers himself, his enemy is
twice-born and true, observing sacred duties, holy and full of light, whose tongue is agni.
sacrificer', he would produce an enemy for him .2 'bring hither the gods to the sacrificer', he says;
may she who gives good gifts, the gracious goddes. s, come speeding nigh to us for our well-being.
10 when singers in their song uplift their voices, some chant the nivid texts with steady purpose.
help, come hither,your chariot, swifter than the mind of mortal, fleet as the wind, three-seated o ye mighty.
3 shake down, o slayer of the foe, those great all splendid enemies.
hail! to the waters hail! to plants hail! to trees hail! to moving creatures hail! to swimming creatures
3 the singers' for their aid, invoke indra and vayu, swift as mind,
for wealth, for law. may we rejoice, most wise one! at the feast, with kine, rejoice, with heroes, at the
i., hence sprinkle forth the juice effused,. soma, the best of sacred gifts,
vaisvanara be gracious to assist us, may the immortal favour us and help us.
savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and made heaven stedfast where no prop supported.
6 the bounteous maruts with the fatness dropping milk fill full the waters which avail in solenm rites.
strength to our seed and progeny that they may live, for thou art he who giveth strength.
a departed are those mortals who in days gone by behold
d thou art the goat, resting on wealth, sit on the earth, mount aloft on the atmosphere, in the sky be thy
open, the open one not close! reverence (be) to the divine folk!
joys, pleasures, delights, jubilation and merriment, all gods in the heavens, founded upon heaven, were born
4 alone or many thou art worshipped, manyu: sharpen the spirit of each clan for battle.
bestow on us what wealth he hath: this even the worshipper awaits.
waking to motion every living creature, she understands the voice of each adorer.
with indra.' at the full moon there is the subsequent offering of the enemy-dispelling (oblation), and by
5 these somas are for wealth of countless cattle, renown therefor, and mighty strength immortal.
the strength-bestowing gift is then made ready, which spread in front, with tongues, erect, he drinketh.
4 agni bestows all vital power even as each man supplicates.
the king shall be effectual strength's upholder: he by the ten bright reins is mostly guided.
thus to this agni have the immortals spoken. to man who spreads the grass may he grant shelter,
strengthen therewith the arya's hate and dasa's, and let the arms of nahusas be mighty.
8 o pusan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy chariot-pole.
specially, soma, sage, by day, coming together for our weal,
o bird, be ominous of happy fortune from no side may calamity befall thee.
10 1 have obtained the horseless car of asvins rich in sacrifice,
o king, we save from death the man whose cure a brahman undertakes.
5 thou art the eye and guard of mighty order, and varuna when to sacrifice thou comest.
the gods did beg the sterile cow of him wilh whom she was born at first. that very one nârada recognised
6 the strength-bestowing offering thus to indra-agni hath been paid, as butter, purified by stones.
time, the steed, runs with seven reins (rays), thousand-eyed, ageless, rich in seed. the seers, thinking holy
this great world was the net of great sakra: with this net of indra i infold all those (enemies) yonder in
14 ye, ever-youthful ones, again remembered tugra, according to your ancient manner:
may the waters afford us welfare, may the herbs be propitious to us i indra's bolt shall beat off the rakshas, far
4 this hath his kinship checked who lives beside us: with ancient streams forth speeds and rules the
7 his are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses move, whose smoke is shining,
then is prepared the effectual oblation, which spread in front, with tongues, erect, he drinketh,
2 for thou at first producest for the holy gods the noblest of all portions, immor-tality:
thou that makest all men sallow, inflarning them like a searing fire, even now, o takman, thou shalt become
who come at early morn, the host of heaven, to drink the soma juice
the fifth day is connected with the rathantara, and therefore on the fifth day (the cup) for indra and
a thou art the hospitality of agni. for visnu thee! thou art the hospitality of soma. for visnu thee!
d let the god savitr set thee free for life, for living, with the pavamana stoma, with the path of the
5 purify soma when effused with stones which bands move rapidly,
e ye twain shall be summoned, o indra and agni ,
we will invoke benevolent earth and heaven. give us, ye gods, riches with noble heroes.
the kindling-stick with the verse, the piler-up of the fire milks the fire. 'seven are thy kindling-sticks, o
with all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with full udders follow on thy path.
6 that mortal, ever unsubdued, gains wealth and every precious thing,
thou, mighty one, art celebrated as a bull, famed as a bull both near and far.
be undeceived; may i deceive n. n.', he says; by that deceit the gods deceived the asuras; verily by this
2 effused, this juice victorious flows for indra, for his maintenance.
accept, o angiras, these our devotions, and let the praise which gods desire address thee.
9 so, wakeful, versed in sacred hymns, the holy singers kindly thee.
4 his goings-forth kindle as 'twere high voices the goings of the auspicious friend of agni.
6 if he, thy true ally, hath sinned against thee, still, varuna, he is the friend thou lovedst.
where art thou? whither art thou gone? for many a place attracts thy mind.
2 the mighty powers wherewith. ye formed the chalices, the thought by which ye drew the cow from out
your sight shall be as clear (as formerly), your strength as abundant, your lustre as great, your vitality as
flying in terror from the snort of vritra all deities who were thy friends forsook thee.
in that he offers the subsidiary sacrifices, verily thus the sacrificer creates offspring. he cuts off from the
3 deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splendour of the sun adorn it.
drink of the pleasant -flavoured juice the first draught is assigned to you.
beyond the two energies mentioned in the purport to the previous verse—maya śhakti and jīva śhakti—there is a third energy of god. this is called yogmaya śhakti, which he refers to in this verse, as divine energy. yogmaya is god’s all-powerful energy. it is called kartum-akartum-samarthaḥ, or “that which can make the impossible possible,” and is responsible for many of the amazing things we attribute to his personality. for example, god is seated in our hearts, yet we have no perception of him. this is because his divine yogmaya power keeps us aloof from him.similarly, god also keeps himself aloof from the influence of maya. in the bhagavatam, the vedas praise the lord:vilajjamānayā yasya sthātumīkṣhā-pathe ’muyā (2.5.13)“maya feels embarrassed to even stand before god.” isn’t it a wonder that although god pervades maya, the material energy, yet he is aloof from it? this is again by the mysterious power of yogmaya.if the world could influence god, then when it decays or is destroyed, his nature and personality will also deteriorate. but despite all modifications in the world, god remains established in his personality. accordingly, the vedas call god by the name daśhāṅgulī, or “ten fingers.” he is in the world, and yet ten fingers beyond it—untouched by it.
as such, o maghavan, indra, who lovest song, even as a lover bear my call.
he did not, forsooth, call thy name, and thou shalt not delight in this' husband! to the very farthest distance do
people become fain to give to him. he upon whom what is as it were ready to be given is not bestowed
eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones within the depth, and let them sink without a sound.
gape widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour: let all the vasus sit this day beside thee.
1 o soma, o thou sage, these worlds stand ready to enhance thy might:
food to your praisers, to your bard in deeds of might give winning wisdom, power uninjured,
in that he casts forward the straw with them, he makes the sacrificers to go by the steeds of the gods to
even as the soma (sacrifices) come together in competition, so the new and full moon (sacrifices) are
powerful; by tribulation is he seized whose foe is superior to him; in that he offers to indra, the freer
be, like thyself, o indra, strong for our delight: here lauded, aid us, maghavan, drinker of the juice.
2 these men have come to indra for assistance: shall he not quickly come upon these pathways?
l may thy mother approve thee, thy father, thy brother sprung of the same womb, thy friend in the herd.
lauded by thee, these maruts, sons o rudra, o rsi, have sent down the heavenly treasure.
the food to which all deities and mortals, calling it meath, gather themselves together.
become naked. he scratches himself with the horn of the black antelope and smiles, holding it for the
in this verse, shree krishna mentions that those enlightened souls who know him are truly devoted to him, and even at the time of their death, they are in full consciousness of him. such true devotees attain his divine abode. but how can one remember god even at the time of death? death is said to be a very painful journey, comparable to 2000 scorpions biting at the same time. such extreme pain is beyond the tolerance of any normal human; a person loses consciousness; the mind and the intellect stop working much before the end. one cannot remember anything in that state. where is the question of remembering god? how do they do it then?those enlightened beings who have attained true knowledge are ever filled with devotion to god, their mind and intellect, all surrendered and attached to him alone. thus, their bodies are beyond pleasure and pain even at the time of death. their soul is completely disconnected from lamentation and hankering at the material level because it is no longer in bodily consciousness. shree krishna has explained the words adhibhūta, adhidaiva, and adhiyajña in the next chapter.
awakening the world with purple horses, on her well-harnessed chariot dawn approaches.
as god, the secret names of gods he utters, to be declared on sacred grass more widely.
the (liturgies called) katurhotârah, the âpri-hymns, the triennial sacrifices, the (formulas called) nîvid, the
deep darkness fell upon the slain, and indra won by victory the right of being first invoked.
7 with service for chief bliss i seek the lord of sacrifice, agni, whom
25 now srutakaksa sings his song that cattle and the steed may come,
midday pressing; the syllables herein are four, the tristubh has four padas, the midday pressing is
7 so among mortals was immortal agni stablished as holy wise and willing envoy.
6 and indra, like the herald priest, desirous of the milky juice,
come, thou most mighty vritra-slayer, meet for praise, come to, libations and to hymns!
midst of the waters, as though standing in the ocean, the beneficent (floods, or the vigorous priests) cleanse
pressers, blend soma juice for him, each draught most excellent, for him
in the last two verses, shree krishna promised knowledge and then qualified it with eight merits. it is mentioned here as “this dharma,” or the path of loving devotion to god.no matter how wonderful the knowledge and how effective the path, it remains useless to one who refuses to walk on it. as explained in the previous verse, direct perception of god comes later; initially, a leap of faith is required to begin the process. the bhakti rasāmṛit sindhu (1.4.15) states: ādau śhraddhā tataḥ sādhusaṅgo ’tha bhajanakriyā “the first step in the path to god-realization is to have faith. then one begins participating in satsaṅg (spiritual programs). this leads to the personal practice of devotion.”often people say that they are only willing to believe in what they can directly perceive, and since there is no immediate perception of god, they do not believe in him. however, the fact is that we believe in so many things in the world too, without direct perception of them. a judge delivers judgment upon a case concerning an event that took place many years in the past. if the judge adopted the philosophy of believing only what he or she had directly experienced, then the entire legal system would fail. a president administers a country on the basis of reports from all over the country. it is impossible for him to visit and see all the villages and cities within his domain. now, if he was not willing to believe these reports, on the grounds that he had no direct perception of what was happening, how would he be able to administer the whole country? so, even in material activities, faith is required at every step. the bible states this very nicely: “we walk by faith, and not by sight.” (2 corinthians 5:7)there is a beautiful story regarding perception of god. a king once accosted a sadhu with the statement, “i do not believe in god because i cannot see him.” the sadhu asked for a cow to be brought to king’s court. the king obliged and ordered his servants to bring a cow. the sadhu then requested that it be milked. the king again instructed his servants to do as the sadhu wanted. the sadhu asked, “o king! do you believe that this milk, freshly taken out from the cow, contains butter?” the king said he had full faith that it did. the sadhu said, “you cannot see the butter in the milk. then why do you believe it is there?” the king replied, “we cannot see it at present because the butter is pervading the milk, but there is a process for seeing it. if we convert the milk into yogurt, and then churn the yogurt, the butter will become visible.” the sadhu said, “like the butter in the milk, god is everywhere. if we cannot immediately perceive him, we should not jump to the conclusion that there is no god. there is a process for perceiving him; if we are willing to have faith and follow the process, we will then get direct perception of god and become god-realized.”belief in god is not a natural process that we as human beings just follow. we have to exercise our free will and actively make a decision to have faith in god. in the assembly of the kauravas, when dushasan endeavored to disrobe draupadi, lord krishna saved her from shame and embarrassment by lengthening her sari. all the kauravas present saw this miracle, but refused to have faith in the omnipotence of shree krishna and come to their senses. the supreme lord says in this verse that those who choose not to have faith in the spiritual path remain bereft of divine wisdom and continue rotating in the cycle of life and death.
the pressure that comes from the midst of men, she shall spread out for us, and fit. herself for us!
(with these words) he makes him speak over the last two udumbara (sticks) ; verily by means of the
let my eyes be opened to behold you; let my mind be eager to know you;
broughtest the face unclouded of the strengthening one, performing much even now, worthy art thou of
not for a moment only lasts thy bounty, lord of many men:
heroic hearted; 'goer' is thy name; do thou follow the course of the adityas.
he hath brought down from heaven's most lofty summit the ocean of the rain, celestial waters.
pressed is the juice divine with milk commingled: thereto hath indra ever been accustomed.
3 o indu, soma, send us now great opulence from every side, pour on us treasures thousandfold.
i brought another low, with strength i bent his strength: i let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power.
like an oblation on the grass, to please him, i bring this to vaisvanara, hymn-inspirer.
may we be his who pays thee, god, due honour. ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.
ne'er do they slumber, never close their eyelids, faithful, far-ruling for the righteous mortal.
a friend we count thee, sharp-edged, thunder-wielder, steer strong of body, overthrowing many.
i the rudra in the fire, in the waters, in the plants, the rudra that hath entered all beings, to that rudra
8 praised is the gift of him the very wealthy: may we enjoy it, men with hero children:
messenger we choose.' then the gods prospered, the asuras were defeated. the man for whom, knowing
with mighty strength, most liberal of the princes, chiefs of the host, by law made vrtra's slayers.
just as darkness can never engulf the sun, similarly, illusion can never again overcome the soul who has once attained enlightenment. tadviṣhṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśhyanti sūrayaḥ “those who have realized god always remain in god-consciousness.”under the illusion of maya, we see the world as separate from god, and establish friendship or enmity with other human beings depending upon whether they satisfy or harm our self-interest. divine knowledge that comes with enlightenment changes our perspective and vision of the world. enlightened saints see the world as the energy of god, and utilize whatever comes their way in the service of god. they also see all human beings as parts of god and harbor a divine attitude toward everyone. thus, hanuman says:sīyā rāmamaya saba jaga jānī, karauñ pranāma jori juga pānī. (ramayan)[v34]“i see the forms of lord ram and mother sita in everyone, and so i fold my hands and offer my respects to all.”
i homage to him of the ditch, and to him of the lake.
eager to win the breathing and the breathless. all sang thy praise at banquet and oblation.
agni, with their thoughts', he says; with the purpose for which he raises him, he verily unites him. he
11 they have been poured upon the fleece towards the meath-distilling vat:
7 indra and agni, come to us with favour, ye who conquer men:
whose sacrifice the strong seek, agni, when it shines for never-failing offspring in thine own abode.
8 resting in you, o gods, we are like men who fight in coats of mail.
1 to splendid agni seated by the altar, loving well his home, i bring the food as 'twere his place of birth.
swiftly he reaches destruction; it is red, for it has rudra as its deity; (verily it serves) for prosperity. the
2 by means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to hand,
pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for soma, pure, be glad.
injury to it, for one hurts not oneself. 'may the wives of the gods thee', he says; the wives of the gods
as strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring us hitherward bhaga who discovers treasure.
4 o indra, hear tirasci's call, the call of him who serveth thee.
whom thou, as varuna in accord with mitra, guardest, o god, by banishing his trouble.
now lift ye up yourselves and look on indra's seasonable share.
15 purified for the feast of gods, go thou to indra's special place,
are six; verily with the seasons he ploughs him. in that (he ploughs) with (a team) of twelve oxen, (he
power in accord. there is (an offering) to vaiçvanara on twelve potsherds; the year has twelve months,
14 to the brown juice may his dear vigorous bay steeds bring indra, to our holy task.
2 ye, as ye wist, have gained of your own selves your power: high, o ye mighty ones, and wide ye
death from hunger, and death from thirst, poverty in cattle, and failure of offspring, all that, o apâmârga, do we
them he makes him to fall. 'be firm, of strong limbs', (with these words) he places (agni) on the ass ;
8 when as a spark he cometh near the ocean, still looking with a vulture's eye to heaven,
fair-formed, of different hues and yet one-minded, night and dawn clash not, neither do they tarry.
.7.5 mantra 5: the explanation of the filling of the dhruva
the foemen, measuring exceeding closely, abandoned to sudas all their provisions.
the human body houses five senses—the senses of sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing—and these, in contact with their objects of perception, give rise to sensations of happiness and distress. none of these sensations is permanent. they come and go like the changing seasons. although cool water provides pleasure in the summer, the same water gives distress in the winter. thus, both the perceptions of happiness and distress experienced through the senses are transitory. if we permit ourselves to be affected by them, we will sway like a pendulum from side to side. a person of discrimination should practice to tolerate both the feelings of happiness and distress without being disturbed by them.the technique of vipassanā, which is the primary technique of self-realization in buddhism, is based on this principle of tolerance of sense perceptions. its practice helps eliminate desire, which, as stated in the four noble truths (the truth of suffering, the truth of the origin of suffering, the truth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth of the path leading to the cessation), is the cause of all suffering. this is not surprising considering that buddhist philosophy is a subset of the vast vedic philosophy.
then ye brought surya forward who was lying hidden in the sea.
6 increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well, o god, art thou,
beings thee!' (with these words) he takes up the ladle; of the gods that are that is the share; verily he
7 this is the thought, this is the song, o asvins: accept this hymn of ours, ye steers, with favour.
agnidh's altar is as it were the atmosphere; on the agnidh's altar he puts down a stone, for reality;
7 best sacrificer, bring the gods, o agni, to the pious man:
became of bay colour, he saw these (cups) for the maruts, to save himself;' he drew them ; verily with
verily he ascends the atmosphere. he approaches the sadas; verily he makes him go to the world of
36 agni was born the first of all, like surya lovely with his light:
3 with hymns the deft priest is about you, asvins, the eloquent priest attends you now, nasatyas.
2 in the tree-tops the air he hath extended, put milk in kine and vigorous speed in horses,
3 not even all the gathered gods conquered thee, indra, in the war,
with raised tail. to indra, the good protector, he offers a cake on eleven potsherds and to indra, who
5 dawns, who come forward with the bright beams of the sun, and at your earliest flushing bring to us
herein', he says; verily continuing the sacrifice he points it out to the gods. 'seven are thy kindlingsticks, o agni, seven thy tongues' , he says, for sevenfold in seven-wise are the dear forms of agni;
pressing is connected with the gayatri; verily thereby he obtains the morning pressing. (he presses)
either side, on the left the black, on the right the white; having offered them he should put down the
with sacrifice i purge both earth and heaven: i burn up great she-fiends who serve not indra,
2 so humbly worship varuna the mighty revere the wise guard of world immortal.
we ask you to steer us away from an evil path. please put us on a course which has your blessings.
makes the people of one mind with him; 'come hither, o ye maruts rich in dew, with this lord of the
13 borne on their flashing car, the spear-armed maruts, the nimble youths of heaven, the sons of
radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the luminous realm of -heaven.
also that is as when one makes preparation for a man about to go to (another) people . (the offering)
d may the dhisanas, the goddesses connected with the all-gods, kindle thee on the abode of earth, in the
for in thee bounteous one, in thee the sovran, agni, are many boons for him who serves thee.
2 he was set down mid men as priest unerring, agni, wise, welcome in our holy synods.
him that rivals us, or does not rival us, him that curses us with hate, may all the gods injure my charm protects
27 the tribes who bring oblations call to thee, to thee to give them help,
blest, indra, is thy favour dropping fatness: thy worship, much-invoked! brings gifts in thousands.
4 thee, thee most glorious one we make our messenger. bring the gods hither to the feast.
they seemed to long for kine when i departed. hence, into distance, be ye gone, o panis.
shine then to-day, rich maid, on him who lauds thee, shine down on us the gift of life and offipring.
40 in the first vault of heaven loud roared the ocean, king of all being, generating creatures.
19 ye who bless sacrifice, go forth, for verily we choose you both,
the child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan of sacrifice,
the viraj he secures food for him. he should repeat thirty-two, for one who desires support; the
she hath brought forth sun, sacrifice, and agni, and far away hath fled detested darkness.
of the sacrifice. 'all that is dear to it is invoked', he says; verily not vainly does he invoke.
here, shree krishna has given the example of the breeze to explain the process of transmigration of a soul from one body into another. similar to the breeze, which carries with it the fragrances of the flowers, upon the death of the gross body, the soul carries with it the subtle and the causal bodies, these include the senses and the mind. (the concept of three kinds of bodies has been explained in detail in verse 2.28).even when the material body dies, the soul continues to carry the mind along with the experiences of its past lifetimes from its former body to the new one. that explicates why people who are born blind can still dream, probably based on their experiences from past lives. dreams are considered to be a visual representation of what we see or think during waking hours. it might be in a distorted or rambled form, which gets connected in our mind when we sleep. for example, someone saw a bird flying and thought, “how wonderful will it be to fly like a bird!” sometime later, he dreams that he is flying in his human body itself. yet, a blind person who has not seen anything from birth dreams, this can only be due to all the impressions that are stored in the subconscious mind, which it carries with it from past lifetimes.in the next verse, shree krishna explains what the soul does with the mind and senses it takes with it when it departs from its present body.
victor in fight, unshaken and resistless--may he protect our armies in our battles!
having offered the çatarudriya, he should put down on the last brick an oblation of gavidhuka; verily he
indra, these (cups), for indra kept making these forms. the çukra is yonder sun, the manthin is the
he restrains his speech, for the support of the sacrifice. 'this brahman has consecrated himself', he says
not to the fanged that bites, not to the toothless: give not us up, thou conqueror, to the spoiler.
him, bright and radiant, living men have stablished as their blithe priest, the chief of sacrificers.
why 'mid the nahusha tribes shall sate this indra with his soma juice?
truly she fo1loweth the path of order, nor faileth, knowing well, the heavenly quarters.
then why is the sacrifice indra's up to the completion?' they say. the sacrifice is the sacrificial body of
saman or yajus, is loose; whatever by a rc is firm; they are drawn with a support in front to the
may we through this our song be happy gainers, god, of a fair and spacious habitation.
make the sun visible, make food abundant, slaughter the foes, pierce through and free the cattle.
24 knowing our chief felicity, o agni, bring hither ample riches to our nobles,
father and mother, sweetof speech, fairhanded, may they, far-famed, in every fight protect us.
flow to the song inspiring car-borne hero, to mighty indra, him who wields the thunder!
mitra who knoweth leadeth us, and varuna who guideth straight,
these first, the boundless sea, and matarisvan, fierce-glowing fire, the strong, the bliss-bestower.
the divine agni, holds in his hands many good gifts for men. he conveys our prayers
9 may aditi defend us, may aditi guard and shelter us,
ne'er may the tawny god, fair-checked, and gracious, swifthearing, yield us to this evil purpose.
many fiends follow me; help me, thou tawny-hued; pass on beyond these barriers.
4 standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people, indra, in the fray invoke thee.
the sterile cow fulfils all wishes in the kingdom of yama for him that gives her. but they say that hell falls to
whence he was born a guest enriched with holy oil, born as ordainer and as priest.
n the foe who, o indra and vayu, is hostile to us,
hero who fortified his body in the wars, and through his greatness set the heaven upon his head.
6 so mighty thou protectest us from slander, o champion, agni! with all fires enkindled.
for indra is the treasure of the gods, and that is why the new moon night has its name (ama-vasya),
13 the gods have come to indu well-descended, beautified with milk,
14 the pitchers, indu, with thy streams have sung aloud in vigorous might
vouchsafe them ample room, far off be danger. through grace of heaven and earth may we be happy.
within this car are stored three kindred shares of food, and a skin filled with meath is rustling as the
the red, the brown of varuna ever mindful: may they ward off from us all grief and trouble.
this juice have we made sweet for thee like barley, blending it with milk.
all fair and lovely treasures-at your glad carouse-thou givest him who offers. thou art waxing great.
exaltation) is fixed; time is the lord of everything, he was the father of pragâpati.
those influenced by sattva are equipped with a measure of purity, virtue, knowledge, and selflessness. hence, their actions are performed with a relatively pure intention and the results are uplifting and satisfying. those influenced by rajas are agitated by the desires of their senses and mind. the intention behind their works is primarily self-aggrandizement and sense-gratification for themselves and their dependents. thus, their works lead to the enjoyment of sense pleasures, which further fuels their sensual desires. those who are predominated by tamas have no respect for scriptural injunctions and codes of conduct. they commit sinful deeds to relish perverse pleasures, which only result in further immersing them in delusion.
scriptures are the guide maps given to humans on the journey toward enlightenment. they provide us with knowledge and understanding. they also give us instructions on what to do and what not to do. these instructions are of two kinds—vidhi and niṣhedh. the directives to perform certain activities are called vidhi. the directives not to perform certain activities are called niṣhedh. by faithfully following both these kinds of injunctions, human beings can proceed toward perfection. but the ways of the demoniac are the reverse of the teachings of the scriptures. they engage in prohibited acts and refrain from recommended ones. referring to such people, shree krishna declares that those who renounce the authorized path and act according to their whims, impelled by the impulses of their desires, achieve neither true knowledge, nor the perfection of happiness, nor liberation from material bondage.
6 cleaver of stalls, kine-winner, armed with thunder, who quells an army and with might destroys it.follow him, brothers! quit yourselves like heroes, and like this indra show your zeal and courage.
when the steed bringeth down your grace and favour in bodies dear and worshipful.
formula (yajus), so many cattle would be as he might consecrate himself for. 'o soma, give so much
e he should pile (the fire) of a thousand (bricks) when first piling (it); this world is commensurate with a
o ye wealthy, irresistible (plants), ye do generously bestow benefits. and ye strengthen the hair, and,
4 for all men bring their will to him the resolute, to him the holy one, to him the strong they cleave.
7 yea, let the asvins twain he gracious unto us, even rudras, and all gods, bhaga, rathaspati;
the lord of light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid with power and with the help he gives.
13 soma who gives success goes forth, goes to the gathering place of gods,
7 refresh the horses, win the prize before you: equip a chariot fraught with happy fortune.
6 now have i praised the forest queen, sweet-scented, redolent of balm,
18 adityas, ye most mighty ones, grant to our children and their seed
for thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin: o indra, turn us not away.
all this world.' they called to them, and they depositing their might in day and night came up to them.
served with oblations, first-born, mountain-render, angiras' son, brhaspati, the holy,
with their own share; verily they give him food; he becomes an eater of food. the cow is the sap of the
thou dost shelter agni within, (and) the domestics together with the cattle. thou that hast produced, art rich in
not one of these is match for thee, o indra. thou far surpassest all these living creatures.
since at thy birth all deities adorned thee for the great fight, o thou invoked of many.
b that disease of yours, o indra and varuna, that is in the fire, that of yours i appease hereby; that
songs, indra, active in their might, are beautified for thee, wherewith
6 what wound soe'er the dark bird hath inflicted, the emmet, or the serpent, or the jackal,
sacrifice; verily by them do they proceed to the world of heaven . they mount the world of heaven
gods strengthened thee for work that must be glorified, agni, while they made butter pure for sacrifice.
2 yea, he hath been acknowledged as most mighty, the joyous priest of men, the youthful agni.
prajapati assigned food to the gods; he said, 'whatever shall be left over these worlds, be that mine.'
b homage to you that are in bands, and to you that are destructive homage!
who, furthering the light of law, hath spread himself to meet this work:
27 who hath inclined this glorious one, buunteous himself, to give me gifts.
holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, thunder-armed, make all our pathways pleasant
16 the bhrgus are like suns, like kanvas, and have gained all that their thoughts were bent upon.
charity in the mode of ignorance is done without consideration of proper place, person, attitude, or time. no beneficial purpose is served by it. for example, if money is offered to an alcoholic, who uses it to get inebriated, and then ends up committing a murder, the murderer will definitely be punished according to the law of karma, but the person who gave the charity will also be culpable for the offence. this is an example of charity in the mode of ignorance that is given to an undeserving person.
and yet not offered. now the raksases are fain to hurt him who is consecrated while he sleeps. agni
hair, with a yajus, for destruction. indra slew vrtra; his eyeball fell away; it became collyrium. when he
are brought. 'that in truth is penance', they say, 'if a man gives his wealth.' the gayatri flew up, of four
9 thou, indra, mighty one, didst crush usas, though daughter of the sky.
the brâhmana was the first to be born, with ten heads and ten mouths. he was the first to drink the soma; that
the great priest, born, who knows the clouds, abider with men, is seated in the waters' eddy.
they performed the agnihotra as the vow; therefore one should perform the vow twice, for twice they
says; verily upon offspring he bestows breath. 'thou art the trivrt, thou art the pravrt', he says, for
the water with which they bathe the dead, with which they moisten his beard, that very one, o oppressor of
in the previous verses, shree krishna discussed the constituents of action. then he described the factors that motivate and control action. now, he moves on to the goal of action. the ultimate motive behind people’s actions is the search for happiness. everyone desires to be happy, and through their actions they seek fulfillment, peace, and satisfaction. but since everyone’s actions differ in their constituent factors, the kind of happiness they derive out of their work is also different. shree krishna now goes on to explain the three categories of happiness.
2 lord of bay steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee: this we crave. here the disposers wait on thee.
(the god) that has caused (disease) shall perform the cure; he is himself the best physician.
7 wondrous! of wondrous power! give to the singer wealth wondrous, marked, most wonderful, lifegiving.
for unto thee, o angiras, o son of strength, move ladles in the sacrifice.
12 send riches hither with thy stream in thousands, both of steeds and kine,
corner near the fire is of the same height as the sacrificer; in that he anoints the corner near the fire, he
parting metre; the voices metre; the radiant metro; the sastubh metre; the anustubh metre; the kakubh
he says; verily he invokes this blessing (on him). if he were to say 'who hast chosen agni as hotr', he
agni is head and height of heaven, the master of the earth is he:
2 great is that secret name and far-extending, whereby thou madest all that is and shall be.
2 with bow let us win kine, with bow the battle, with bow be victors in our hot encounters.
he, searching for the horse's head that in the mountains lay concealed,
20 show forth the mind that brings success in war with fiends, wherewith thou conquerest in fight.
we make this indra very strong to strike the mighty vritra dead:
2 o devas! shower your benevolence upon us. may you be generous to us ever, approving of the
milk departs from him; verily he is seized with evil; in that it is of clotted milk, thereby he bestows milk
connected with the gayatri; verily at the morning pressing he produces the metres in the response; now
5 ye twain to bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region's end,
warding off curses, king of all existence, he shall find way for prayer the while they cleanse him.
he surely did bring hither all the beings (worlds), he surely did encompass all the beings (worlds). being their
from thy bones, marrow, sinews and arteries; from thy hands, fingers, and nails i do tear out the disease.
wide as a mountain spread on all sides, lord of heaven!
6 may he enjoy this hallowed gift, agni accept our songs, who bears
rest upon the sacrifice or on the lord of the sacrifice? he replied, 'on the lord of the sacrifice.' 'but in
this is thy boast, thou smotest with thy peers, and joined with heroes dravest off disgrace.
4 yea, very hard art thou to grasp, like offspring of the wriggling snakes,
'may parjanya not rain', he should put it on upwards; verily he holds up rain. what is dug in belongs to
may their sire rudra, young and deft, and prsni pouring much milk, bring fair days to the maruts.
indu, to us for this great rite, bearing as 'twere thy wave to gods, unwearied, thou art flowing on.
when, fixing them apart, vast, most extensive, the steer roars loudly in far-reaching courses.
therewith send wealth: to us with full enjoyment, a hero son and gifts of kine and horses.
is the overcomer of foes; (verily it serves) for victory. he puts on one of vikankata; verily he wins light.
5 in the company of learned people, the one who uses his faculty of speech meaningfully, courteously,
fear in his house before the year (was over). 'recite, let us two rejoice',' he responds, and thereby he
or from the adhvaryu's purifying filter, i offer thee with heart and cry of vasat!
have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brought it as a son, our stay for ever.
kind as a friend to men who keep the holy law.
10 come to our home resolved to slay the dasyu: kutsa longed eagerly to win thy friendship.
5 he with his might made firm the forward-bending hills, the downward rushing of the waters he
4 far-seeing hath this agni been established, deathless mid mortals, wise among the foolish.
7 o heroes, ye gave wisdom to kaksivan who sprang from pajra's line, who sang your praises.
for our well-spoken hymn give life, o indu. do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
2 thy mighty stallions, yoked by prayer, o indra, thy. coursers to thy mighty chariot harnessed,ascend thou these, and borne by them come hither: with soma juice out. poured, indra, we call thee.
the rc and the saman, unwilling to remain with the gods for the sacrifice, taking the form of a black
who knows thus reaches not destruction from soma. when they press soma they kill him; he keeps back
among mankind many are thy libations, and many a time the pious sage invokes thee.
shree krishna has revealed to arjun his will that the kauravas should perish and the kingdom of hastinapur should be administered by the pandavas in accordance with rules of dharma. he has already decided the annihilation of the unrighteous and the victory of the righteous as the outcome of the battle. his grand scheme for the welfare of the world cannot be averted by any means. he now informs arjun that he wishes him to be the nimitta-mātram, or the instrument of his work. god does not need the help of a human for his work, but humans attain eternal welfare by working to fulfill god’s wish. opportunities that come our way to accomplish something for the pleasure of the lord are a very special blessing. it is by taking these opportunities that we attract his special grace, and achieve our permanent position as the servant of god.shree krishna also encourages arjun to be his instrument by reminding him of the exceptional skills he has received in the art of archery by his grace. hence, he addresses him with the vocative savya-sāchin, meaning expert archer, since arjun is admirably ambidextrous and is able to discharge arrows with either hand.
soma, effused, is purified and blended our hymns and trstup songs unite in soma.
6 thy spirit, that went far away to beams of light that flash and flow,
puronuvakyas contain the word 'quarter', for the conquest of the quarters.
hymns, only hymns, with love for thee, i weave thee: then hear, o indra, these mine invocations.
'the oblation is the sacrifice; let us have a share in it.' he said, 'lot them offer to you the portions of the
dawn, at her rising, urges forth the living him who is dead she wakes not from his slumber.
to thee alone, o lord of strength, go, as it were, all songs of praise.
14 thou radiant mover of sweet sounds, with wealth of horses and of kine
potsherds; to rudra, lord of cattle, an oblation of gavidhuka; to brhaspati, lord of speech, an oblation of
for thee a new hymn, lord of bays! is fashioned. may we, car-borne, through song be victors ever.
pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go forth, o soma, into indra's throat!
power of rudra , and he would be liable to die. or rather they say, 'all the gods are the fire, the beast
5 send to us bounty manifold, o indra, worthy of' our wish,
may be by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of mitra, varuna, and the floods.
7 ten sister maids of slender form seize him within the press and hold
4 not one is found among them, none of mortals, to blame our sires who fought to win the cattle.
then they, ancient and young, who dwell together, seven sounding rivers, as one germ received him.
10 may all the gods who strengthen law, with rtus, listening to our call,
the fire eats food up to the third generation. the re-piling is like the re-establishment of the fire; he who
accept, o maruts, graciously this hymn of mine that we may live a hundred winters through its power.
bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings.
4 they, even the maruts who were there, excited with song the meath-created strength of indra.
as it is cooked by the fire when thou art spitted,
the hotr addresses the adhvaryu, he puts fear in him; if be were not to smite it off , they would have
8 as ministering priests they held, by pious acts they won themselves,
beyond this realm there is another glory so through old age they pass and feel no sorrow.
18 be helping friend of those who seek thy friendship . give life, when lauded, indra, to the singer.
k thou art speech, derived from indra, destroying the foe ; do thou enter me with speech, with power
8 sit down with us, o indra, sit beside the juice to drink the meath.
o indra, thou hast filled mid-air's wide region, and given the gods by battle room and freedom.
comes, to all of them hospitality is offered; the metres are the retinue of king soma. 'thou art the
looker on heavenly light, lord of this moving world, lord, indra, of what moveth not.
may i beget honey for myself; may i obtain honey for myself! bringing milk, o agni, i have come:. endow me
therefore a man can contract all the other members (of the body) except the head, but the bead not. the
hither', he says. rudra is the harsh one of the gods; verily he places him below her, for guiding
son (pragâpati) begot of yore that which was, and that which shall be.
h may we win by thy help, o agni, our wish,
the powerful conqueror, invincible in war, him at whose birth the mighty ones,
12 make our wealth perfect thou, o agni, lord divine: for thou hast kinship with the gods.
far off or present even now, send forth thy shouting first of all!
3 with flame insatiate, like eternal might; caring for each one like a dame at home;
the lord controls the world with grandiose forces of creation, maintenance, and annihilation. at present, he is being perceived by arjun in this mode as the all-devouring force that is engulfing his friends and allies from all sides. viewing the apparition of future destined events in the cosmic form of god, arjun sees his enemies being wiped out in the imminent battle. he also sees many of his allies in the grip of death. petrified by the spectacle he is seeing, arjun supplicates before shree krishna in the next verse.
with sacrifice we seek to thee fair cherisher of manly might
7 indra, unconquered might is thine, thunderer, caster of the stone;
13 listen, all-gods, to this mine invocation, ye who inhabit heaven, and air's midregions,
(stoma), for support; verily also they place radiance in themselves. there is a trinava (stoma), for con
over the cleansing sieve have flowed the pavamanas in a stream, girt by the maruts, gladdening, steeds with
5 bring gifts to mitra and to varuna who, lords of all, in spirit never fail the worshipper,
or when the worshipper augments his riches let not his treasures be shut up
with the gracious (waters) do i delight thy heart, mayest thou, free from disease, full of force, rejoice! clothed in
thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gyifts, true art thou,, lordly in thine act.
these of brhaspati, like hunters' arrows, go to the skies that change their hue like serpents.
this spotted bull hath come and sat before the mother in the east,
in time tapas (creative fervour) is fixed; in time the highest (being is fixed); in time brahma (spiritual
3 on through the long wool of the sheep to the meath-dropping vat he flows:
5 him who is sung aloud by recent sages, like a ripe-fruited tree, a scythe-armed victor,i, like a bridegroom thinking of his consort, call hither indra, him invoked of many;
8 this the sweet draught, with cows, the men, the mountains, the waters, indra, have for thee made
fourfold stoma is the highest of stomas, the three-night sacrifice the highest of sacrifices, the horse the
striving within the votary's house thou drivest all the glooms away.
(we know) thee whom ikshvâku knew of yore, whom the women, fond of kushtha, knew, whom vâyasa and
wherewith we may enjoy ourselves, o victor, with undiminished life and hero children.
hastening like a car to men, to those who live, the god without delay gives boons to be desired.
4 agni, spread forth, as ruler, over living things: give wealth to us, immortal god.
kings, indra-varuna, i would turn you hither to this our sacrifice with gifts and homage.
gods. men appoint portions to him who knows thus. creatures slew hunger, man at once, the gods at the
o indu, soma, send us now great opulence from every side:
who smites in the stronghold.' he plucked out a bunch of darbha grass, pierced the seven hills, and
from rudra . (the stone) for pressing out the upançu (cup) is this aditya vivasvant; it lies round this
6 o soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the sheep's long wool,
may he himself with darts of death drive far from us the scorner's hate.
he shines, all-knowing, with his lotty splendour: chasing black night he comes with white-rayed
bring, visvakarman strengthened by oblation, thyself, thy body-'tis thine own-for worship
he who receives thee as a gift, o house, and he by whom thou hast been built, both these, o mistress of
(cup) the çukra, the manthin, the agrayana, the (cup) for the all-gods, the dhruva, the (cup) for
may our prayer be victorious in battles, may we have rain from heaven to make us prosper.
you.' he gave it to him, he accepted it, and (saying), 'thou didst further me', gave it to visnu. visnu
he born small becomes great ; 'most extensive, impetuous, winning food', he says; verily he makes
through these our praises, come thou to meet us, bright as the sunlight,
3 in the wild joy of soma i demolished sambara's forts, ninety-and-nine, together;
9 thus have i called you to our aid as sages called on you of old:
2 indra, thou humbledst tribes that spake with insult by breaking down seven autumn forts, their refuge.
together the shoulders (of the fire). 'the tiger in strength', (with these words) he puts down in the right
that do i bring here to thee that thou mayst rejoice in it,
his voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. let us adore this wind with our oblation.
shree krishna explains that the destiny awaiting the souls is based upon the guṇas of their personalities. we get what we deserve is god’s law, the law of karma. those who cultivated virtues, knowledge, and a service attitude toward others are born in families of pious people, scholars, social workers, etc. or else, they go to the higher celestial abodes. those who permitted themselves to be overcome by greed, avarice, and worldly ambitions are born in families focused on intense material activity, very often the business class. those who were inclined to intoxication, violence, laziness, and dereliction of duty are born amongst families of drunks and illiterate people. otherwise, they are made to descend down the evolutionary ladder and are born into the animal species.many people wonder whether having once attained the human form, it is possible to slip back into the lower species. this verse reveals that the human form does not remain permanently reserved for the soul. those who do not put it to good use are subject to the terrible danger of moving downward into the animal forms again. thus, all the paths are open at all times. the soul can climb upward in its spiritual evolution, remain at the same level, or even slide down, based upon the intensity and frequency of the guṇas it adopts.
he who desires offspring should offer (the oblations to) the minor deities; the minor deities are the
who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth encompassed with far-spreading lustre.
5 if ye at any time this day are listening to this my call,
23 o soma, pavamana, thou pourest out wealth that brings renown:
8 rise up o woman, to the world of the living. your husband is dead.
the earth that has heights, and slopes, and great plains, that supports the plants of manifold virtue, free from
21 from rear, from front, from under, from above us, o king, protect us as a sage with wisdom.
seeking the light, with hymns to thee, o indra, kusikas have brought their gift, the singers.
round heaven and earth from ancient time have travelled, night with her dark limbs, dawn with limbs
8 he issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and found kine hidden somewhere in a stable.
parna overheard it; he whose ladle is made of parna wood is styled famous; he hears no evil bruit. the
swift as the wind let the prince please and feast you: he, like a pious man, gains strength for increase.
the (cups) for the maruts, the (cup) for mahendra, the (cup) for aditya, the (cup) for savitr the (cup) for
9 in fear they raised the lofty self-resplendent hymn, praise giving and effectual, leading up to heaven,
5 with many a son, father of many daughters, he clangs and clashes as he goes to battle.
22 once, only once, the heaven was made, once only once, the earth was formedonce, only prsni's milk was shed: no second, after this, is born.
if one would glut him with the biesting, agni, pierce with thy flame his vitals as he meets thee.
s bring forward the parents born of old with now songs,
12 as keen supporter where great waters gather, light-shedder whom the brood rejoice to look on;
those that are derived from all the gods, the strong (plants) that furnish
grown mighty in his strength, of ample vigour, he as a strikes fear into the dasa,
the asvin pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
so may we under his supreme protection, safe in his arms, succeed in each forth-going.
'do thou lead him forward', (with these words) he puts on the kindling-sticks; that is as when one
10 wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, that, indra, is thy manly strength.
o arise to the sky, aim at the atmosphere, be united with the earth;
drink, indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee, with our milky draught!
.8 sukta 8 – prayer at the consecration of a king
and night, hail!' he says; verily by means of day and night he begets offspring for him, for in accord with
f child of the waters, swift one, the towering onrushing wave most fain to win the prize, with it may he
he hath become all the worlds, he hath come to be.
to agni he offers on eight potsherds; the sacrificial fee is gold. to indra (he offers) on eleven potsherds;
may (the takman) that returns on the morrow, he that returns on two (successive) days, the impious one, pass
who hath become eight-footed or hath got nine feet, the thou sand-syllabled in the sublimest heaven.
then, loudly lowing, came the cows to indu, the chosen, wellloved master in the beaker.
the impetuous, the king, slayer of vrtra, drinker of the soma,
nearest of gods be ye with your protection. may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
o ye are sharers in the remains (of the oblation), well nourished, mighty
gods is the metres, the gayatri, tristubh, and jagati. the gayatri is the jyotistoma, the tristubh, the
we call on thee, o matchless one. we, seeking help, possessing nothing firm ourselves.
4 hither with songs of praise we call indra to drink the soma juice:
accordant, of one mind with surya and with dawn, drink juice, o asvins, three days old.
3 all concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these, twice or thrice, are thine assistants.
cooked to the gods. therefore one should cook it, without burning it, for the gods. he covers it with
12 him have the gods appointed priest of sacrifice, oblation-bearer, passing wise.
hail be, ye wise mitra and varuna: with honey swell ye our kingdom here, (so that it shall) abound in offspring!
the amar kosh (ancient sanskrit dictionary that is widely respected) defines vibhūti as vibhūtir bhūtir aiśhwaryam [v17] (power and wealth). god’s powers and wealth are unlimited. actually, everything about him is unlimited. he has unlimited forms, unlimited names, unlimited abodes, unlimited descensions, unlimited pastimes, unlimited devotees, and so on. hence, the vedas refer to him by the name anant (unlimited):anantaśhchātmā viśhwarūpo hyakartā(śhwetāśhvatar upaniṣhad 1.9)[v18]“god is infinite and manifests in innumerable forms in the universe. although he administers the universe, he is yet the non-doer.” the ramayan states:hari ananta hari kathā anantā [v19]“god is unlimited, and the pastimes he enacts in his unlimited avatārs are also unlimited.” sage ved vyas goes to the extent of saying:yo vā anantasya guṇānanantān anukramiṣhyan sa tu bāla-buddhiḥrajānsi bhūmer gaṇayet kathañchit kālena naivākhilaśhakti dhāmnaḥ(bhāgavatam 11.4.2)[v20]“those who think they can count the glories of god have a childish intellect. we may be successful in counting the specks of dust on the crest of the earth, but we can never count the unlimited glories of god.” therefore, shree krishna says here that he will only be describing a small fraction of his vibhūtis.
like bhaga must he be duly invoked by us, as he who drives the car holds fast the horse's reins.
to the pure earth i speak, to the ground, the soil that has grown through the brahma (spiritual exaltation).
1 beg renown of varuna the mighty, the god exceeding kind to him who worships.
people fall into confusion', he should interchange the animals; verily he causes the people to fall into
delighting in juice, eagerly drinking, the lofty one hath waxed for splendid riches.
immortality; it is of a hundred (krsnalas) in weight, man has a hundred (years of) life, a hundred
praiseworthy, known to all men. may we foster well, during a hundred winters, son and progeny.
with this he should sacrifice who is being practised against; if these deities eat his food, men eat his
let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven.
thou smotest down the swarthy fifty thousand, and rentest forts as age consumes a garment.
the roaring soma drops flow on, like milch-kine lowing to, their calves:
4 with glittering ornaments they deck them forth for show; for beauty on their breasts they bind their
worlds. these (nights) are thirty in number, the viraj has thirty syllables; verily by the viraj they win
who presses out and pours his deep libations forth, o vrtra-slayer, unto thee.
9 may agni bless us with his fires, and surya warm us pleasantly:
3 fain to lend vigour to the bull, the siste.. with reverence recognize the germ within him.
10 kinship have i with you, and close alliance o ye gods, destroyers of our foes.
we stablish thee as manus used, as manus used we kindle thee.
i. when somas flow thou makest pure, indra, thy mind that merits laud
who, like a gambler gathering his winnings seized the foe's riches, he, o men, is indra.
m thou art the eastern, the western (quarter) of the vasus, the rudras , the adityas.
19 may the gods' envoy, sent to many a quarter, proclaim us sinless for our perfect safety.
the men together found the pani's hoarded wealth, the cattle, and the wealth in horses and in kine.
z i sacrifice to thee, i cast forward my prayer to thee,
e'en agni shines resplendent in the brush-wood: the viands hold him as floods hold an island.
may indra slay each best of you when agni's flame hath struck you down!
8 may we, o vrtra-slayer, o hero, find this thy newest boon, longed-for, and excellent, thou who art
may we be glorious among the people. may heaven vouchsafe us this, and earth the goddess,
the sun is the self of all that moveth and standeth.
8 let not this fetter bind us fast: may he release us for success;
when wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds?
2 with soma they brought indra from a distance, over vaisanta, from the strong libation.
i be possessed of a head in yonder world'; verily he becomes possessed of a head in yonder world. he
thee. by means of that do thou, full of force, live (a hundred) autumns; may it not flow out of thee: physicians have
to lose god means to let the mind wander away from him, and to be with him means to unite the mind with him. the easy way to unite the mind with god is to learn to see everything in its connection with him. for example, let us say that someone hurts us. it is the nature of the mind to develop sentiments of resentment, hatred, etc. toward anyone who harms us. however, if we permit that to happen, then our mind comes away from the divine realm, and the devotional union of our mind with god ceases. instead, if we see the supreme lord seated in that person, we will think, “god is testing me through this person. he wants me to increase the virtue of tolerance, and that is why he is inspiring this person to behave badly with me. but i will not permit the incident to disturb me.” thinking in this way, we will be able to prevent the mind from becoming a victim of negative sentiments.similarly, the mind separates from god when it gets attached to a friend or relative. now, if we train the mind to see god in that person, then each time the mind wanders toward him or her, we will think, “shree krishna is seated in this person, and thus i am feeling this attraction.” in this manner, the mind will continue to retain its devotional absorption in the supreme.sometimes, the mind laments over past incidents. this again separates the mind from the divine realm because lamentation takes the mind into the past and the present contemplation of god and guru ceases. now if we see that incident in connection with god, we will think, “the lord deliberately arranged for me to experience tribulation in the world, so that i may develop detachment. he is so concerned about my welfare that he mercifully arranges for the proper circumstances that are beneficial for my spiritual progress.” by thinking thus, we will be able to protect our devotional focus. sage narad states:loka hānau chintā na kāryā niveditātma loka vedatvāt (nārad bhakti darshan, sūtra 61)[v23]“when you suffer a reversal in the world, do not lament or brood over it. see the grace of god in that incident.” our self-interest lies in somehow or the other keeping the mind in god, and the simple trick to accomplish this is to see god in everything and everyone. that is the practice stage, which slowly leads to the perfection that is mentioned in this verse, where we are never lost to god and he is never lost to us.
best leaders, best deliverers to lead us on and bear as safe beyond our foes.
poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am i. save me before it be too late, from this my curse.
1 indra the singers with high praise, indra reciters with their lauds,
pressed out by pressers soma goes over the fleecy backs of sheep,
3 he who hath only wish as his possession casts on himself, casts foam amid the waters.
ye gods that are on the prastara and sit on the strew .
4 ye raise up for the folk an active ruler whom, holy ones! a master's hand hath fashioned.
f be ye pure for the divine rite, for the sacrifice to the gods.
foot (dust) of him (who is expelling him); aditi is this (earth); verily she confirms the kingdom for him;
11 the singer fills the spirit: all mens, love hath he. indra takes kindly care of those who pour the juice.
the word siddhi has numerous connotations and meanings. as per the sanskrit dictionary, a few of them are: attainment of supernatural power, accomplishment, success, performance, fulfillment, solution of a problem, completion of cooking or a task, healing, hitting the mark, maturing, supreme felicity, beatitude, an unusual skill or faculty, perfection.in this verse, shree krishna has used siddhi for perfection in the spiritual path. he says, “only a tiny portion of the innumerable souls are fortunate to get a human birth. amongst them, only a minuscule strive for spiritual perfection. and even among those perfected souls, ones who are aware of my divine glories and paramount position are very rare.”how is it that even perfected souls are unable to know god? the reason is without bhakti or loving devotion, it is not possible to realize the supreme. spiritual aspirants of karm, jñāna, haṭha yog, etc., cannot know god unless they include devotion in their practice. shree krishna has stated this fact several times in the bhagavad gita:“the supreme divine personality is greater than all that exists. although he is all-pervading and all living beings are situated in him, yet he can be known only through devotion.” bg 8.22.“o arjun, by unalloyed devotion alone can i be known as i am, standing before you. thereby, on receiving my divine vision, o scorcher of foes, one can enter into union with me.” bg 11.54“only by loving devotion to me does one come to know who i am in truth. then, having come to know me, my devotee enters into full consciousness of me.” bg 18.55therefore, such spiritual aspirants who do not include devotion in their sadhana attain only limited theoretical knowledge or jñāna. and devoid of vijñāna the experiential knowledge, they are unable to know god or the absolute truth.shree krishna has stated in this verse that only one among numerous humans knows him in truth. in the next verse, he moves on to describe the material and spiritual dimensions of his energies.
7 through his wise insight trita in the cavern, seeking as ever the chief sire's intention,
do homage unto varuna's and mitra's eye: offer this solemn worship to the mighty god,
3 though borne by swift steeds he will yet unyoke them: e'en the fleet chariot hath he stayed from
they, sportive, loudly roaring, armed with glittering spears, shakers of all, themselves admire their
that are in these worlds. he strokes in silence for the fourth time, verily he wins that which is not
5 infallible is agni, he who goes before the tribes of men,
wherewith ye bring delicious honey to the bees,-come hither unto us, o asvins, with those aids.
the latter two milkings; how then can she be milked who is twelve times milked?' having made up the
pour down the flood of meath within thy belly: thou from of old art king of soma juices.
sacrifice he continues it. there is an oblation for sarasvati, and (an offering) on twelve potsherds for
hear thou my call, o indra; be not heedless: thine may we be for thee to give us treasures;
this day, and after, gracious, worship thou our gods, that we may have heroic sons.
indra, the poets with. their hymns extol this hero might of thine:
drink of the meath we offer, and delight thee with food that cometh from the mountain ridges.
10 first and preeminent, excelling all besides are the kind gifts of liberal brhaspati.
2 without whom naught exists, indra the lofty one; in whom alone all powers heroic are combined.
when thou attackest vritra, all the hostile bands shrink and faint, indra, at thy wrath.
6 once to the driver of his chariot, kutsa, he gave up greedy surya, plague of harvest;
take hold of this (charm) that subjects to immortality (life), may thy life unto old age not be cut off! i bring to
he makes the lights of heaven shine forth secure, he bids, exceeding wise, the floods flow for his
year; verily in the seasons and the year they find sup port. again the pankti is of five elements, the
going to indra, sharpening his weapons, and in his hand containing every treasure.
cow is the sap of the metres, the rain indeed is as it were sap; verily by the sap of the metres he wins
it should not rain, on the next day he should offer an oblation. mitra and varuna are day and night, by
the full moon; verily he has recourse to agni with his own share; verily he leads him to the path from
send to us wealth containing all things precious: bestow upon us every sort of riches.
e for a prop, a support, of the five quarters i take thee.
24 burn thou the paired kimidins, brun, agni, the yatudhana pairs.
e be thou refreshment to the fathers, strength to those that sit on
third (mess) for the adityas , (saying) 'let this labour be for enjoyment to me'; they said, 'let us
the feast', they placed agni in this world, and (saying),'the great and powerful one, o agni', they placed
6 another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and knows the places where the treasures lie.
43 harness, o agni, o thou god, thy steeds which are most excellent:
bring hither, o chanter, thy poem, that which earns cattle and earns good things! among the gods (kings) place
ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, asvins, strengthened with your strength the
friends come to pavamana meet for praises, and sound in concert their resistless music.
50 pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send, purified, miich-kine, abundant yielders.
may we agree in mind and thought, may we not struggle with one another, in a spirit displeasing to the gods!
or who give guerdon thousandfold, -even to those let him depart.
c depart not from the life-giving rc, from the saman which protecteth the body.
c thou art the bodily form of penance, prajapati's kind, i buy (soma) with the last offspring of thee that
the burnt; verily by his own share he pacifies him and indicates his foes; whomsoever of those near
6 urge thou thy parents, as a lover ' to delight: the lovely one desires and craves it from his heart.
three draught cows are for the all-gods; the black-spotted hornless ones are for agni and indra.
prepare the implements, make all things ready, and let the sacrifice, my friends, go forward.
penance a third time, he saw this speech of the consecrated, he spoke it. then indeed did he create
4 gods through thy glory, god who art so lovely! granting abundant gifts gained life immortal.
metres. 'all have caused indra to wax', he says; verily he attains increase. 'true lord and lord of strength'
5 thou in thy battles, indra, art subduer of all hostile bands.
8 these thine old deeds new bards have sung, o indra. thou conqueredst, boundest many tribes for
to glory goest thou, sage with disposing skill, like a groomed steed thou rusbest forward to the prize.
4 dropping oil, sweet with soma, pouring forth their stream, are the seven sisters in the seat of
15 of dasa varcin's thou didst slay the hundred thousand and the five,
yonder sun did not shine; the gods desired an atonement for him; for him they offered a white cow to
f may the moving one who strikes at morning delight us;
may they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may they bury death beneath this mountain.
12 now let the heaving earth be free from motion: yea,- let a thousand clods remain above him.
c homage to him of braided hair, and to him of plain hair.
beside the singer, asvins, who longs for your grace and lauds you both. lovers of sweetness, hear my
i think of agni who is kind, whom, as their home, the milch-kine seek;
11 of this we have no knowledge. tall it forth to us, now the youth rests within the chambers of the
agni. 'in the wealth of earth i place thee', he says; verily with these (bricks) he makes these worlds
19 like angiras i honour him with worship, and renovate old song for him the ancient.
girdle part alike for one who desires the world of men, with the top pieces alike for one who desires
c o fair one, clad in fair raiment in the world of heaven be ye two covered....
oblation to varuna; the realm is connected with varuna; verily he attains both the people and the realm.
13 the while the maruts pass along, they talk together on the way:
with kanva hast thou blazed, law-born and waxen strong, thou whom the people reverence.
3 what satisfaction do our hymns afford thee? when, maghavan? now let us do thee service.
sings; three are these worlds; verily from these worlds he redeems it; therefore one should not give to
ford did they place (consecration and penance); he bathes at a ford ; verily he becomes a ford for his
2 flashing like fire, be thou, o conquering manyu, invoked, o victor, as our army's leader.
even thine who furtheredst life with a god's own power, freeing the floods. all that is godless may he conquer with
savitar, god, the lovely-handed, led us, and at his sending forth we flow expanded.
the variegated worm, the four-eyed, the speckled, and the white--i crush his ribs, and i tear off his head.
and energetic enough to thwart the attempts of those who are unfriendly and who want to hurt me.
5 armed with resistless weapons, with vast power to cleave, the vrtra-slayer whets his darts and deals
front. he puts down the last with the word 'light'; there fore speech, which is the last, is the light of the
and may the unobstructed night and morning both, day and night, provide for our protection.
this blessing. then all this comes to pass with regard to the equals of him for whom knowing thus these
may we, o fair of check, win booty with thine aid, o thunderer, swiftly seeking it.
power and strength of the sacrifice in sixteen ways; that became the sodaçin; there is no sacrifice called
5 when to their task they come with zeal, may they obtain the giver's grace,
this bull, this chariot robes him in the sheep's long wool as heproceeds.
f he who piles the fire is made into an offering; just as an offering spills, so he spills who having piled
none may restrain thee, yet come hither to the draught! thou, movest mighty in thy power.
jayeth the vrtras and his foes in battles, and through your mighty favours is made famous.
if it be ready, offer it; unready, ye have been remise.
o indu, bring us wealth in steeds brilliant and quickening all life;
25 maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm soever sindhu or asikni hath,
libation of ghee, verily the sacrificer at the beginning of the sacrifice wins all the gods. the libation of
i call brhaspati, indra, visnu, all the gods, the asvins borne by rapid steeds.
on flows the potent juice, sustainer of the heavens, the strength of gods, whom men must hail with
6 o waxing agni, knower, thou, of all, accept our gifts, the cake,
as such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, thee satakratu, lord of bays.
the weapons of the sacrifice; the weapons of the sacrifice are the sacrifice ; verily he wins the
2 for be is true, whpm men of old enkindled, and the gods themselves,
12 may he, the strong-necked steer, waxing in vigour, gather the foeman's wealth with none to check
that the great cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring a thousand streams, give milk to feed us.
union of the waters and of the plants, to attain both. the sacrificial post is bifurcate, for there are two
supports the manifold breathing, moving thinas, shall afford us cattle and other possessions also!
wishes, 'may the higher sacrifice condescend to him, may he gain the world of heaven.' that is the place
desires a village should offer (a beast) with dappled thighs to indra with the maruts. verily he has
7 with joy, o indra, lord of tawny coursers, the sisters then, these goddesses, extolled thee,
3 for both the warp and woof he understandeth, and in due time shall speak what should be spoken,
whom sages laud with hymns as jatavedas of those who wield the sacrificial ladle.
indra was on a level with the gods, he was not distinguished from them. he ran up to prajapati; he gave
penance jamadagni beheld it, and by it he created various delights; that is why the various (cups) have
5 with brightly-flarning kine whose udders swell with milk, idth glittering lances on your unobstructed
, one should not sit with her, nor eat her food, for she keeps emitting the colour of guilt. or rather
they instigate thy breath, may they instigate thy sight, may they instigate thine ear.
they saw these bodies of the sacrifice, they put them down, and by them they recovered the sacrifice. in
valiant son is born to him. one should disregard this and offer twice. with the first (offering) one grasps
slain is the king of the worms, and their viceroy also is slain. slain is the worm, with him his mother slain, his
1 homage to him of the cistern, and to him of the well.
agni, most youthful god, protect the singer: win us by worship, agni, great possessions.
lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, the wise man who hath sacrificed,
21 wonderful vayu, lord of right, thou who art tvastar's son-in-law,
he bestows splendour on him ; he becomes resplendent. the bull grazes at will, splendour indeed is as
blazing before him strike him down, o agni; let spotted carrion-eating kites devour him.
bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, and let us vanquish with thine aid.
çakvara (saman), the winter (season), an oblation (is made). to savitr, of the atichandas (metre), the
5 let prelude sound and following chant so let him hear the saman sung,
fain to bring light to homes of men the noble and active goddess hath emerged from darkness.
thy laps, o earth, free from ailment! free from disease, shall be produced for us! may we attentively, throuoh
what time, o hero, o'er the sea thou broughtest, in safety broughtest turvasa and yadu.
3 we balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rapturous joy:
in every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to succour us,
a this is thy body, o pure one. this is thy splendour. with it be united. win brightness.
8 he, agni, whom the twice-five sisters, dwelling together, in the homes of men engendered,
10 with reverence they drain the fount that circles with its wheel above,
hawk seated in the press, bird wide-extended, the banner seeking kine and wielding weapons,
5 o maruts, from the ocean ye uplift the rain, and fraught with vaporous moisture pour the torrents
2 to mighty heaven and earth i sing forth loudly: my wish goes out desirous and well knowing
f from every rule of thine, o king varuna, set us free;
heaven. the angirases went to the world of heaven from a place of sacrifice elevated in three places. it
soma-drops rich in meath, waves, to the thunder-armed, to indra, like milch-kine who seek their calf
offspring- prajapati is sixteenfold. (verily it serves) to gain prajapati. (a roof of) twenty-one coverings
for the prosperity of the sattra. verily also whatever is wrongly done in the former days, it serves to
father, nor our mother. cause no injury, o rudra, to our own persons!
sacrifice to obtain its blessing. viçvarupa, tvastr's son, vomited over the beast from above; therefore
10 that brilliant gathering of your cars, the company of maruts, of the youthful ones,
men yearn for children to prolong their line, and are not disappointed in their hope.
she whom visvakarman (the creator of all) did search out by means of oblations, when she had entered the
15 immortal gods have i, vasistha, lauded, gods set on high above all other beings.
from thee who banquetest with gods, from thee who banquetest with us.
the, glittering maids send sura forth, the glorious sisters, close-allied,
refresh the way ye go, refresh the paths with meath: hither, o asvins, bring the skin that holds the
as, ruined by the wind, the trees lie prostrate, thus do thou ruin and prostrate my rivals, those formerly born,
soma speeds onward like a youth to youtlitial maids, and gains the beaker by a course of bundred
4 thine are we, indra, thine, both these who praise thee, and those who give rich gifts, o god and
north he let them loose; this is the auspicious quarter of gods and men (3); verily he lets them loose in
is its success. he breathes over gold; gold is immortality, breath is life; verily with life he quickens
42 may thy bay steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, bring thee to the feast,
may he this day gain with our men the sunlight. may indra, girt by maruts, be oursuccour.
5 may our songs bring you hither to our solemn rites: these drops of mighty vigour have they beauti
of food; (verily it serves) for prosperity. he who being meet for kingship obtains not a kingdom should
the juice of soma thus diffused, sweet to the taste the bright cows drink,
vast as a mountain spread on all sides, lord of heaven.
thou goest on an embassy to surya, subdued by love, desirous of the glory.
that maghavan whom men must laud with singing, heaven-dweller, king of songs, whose help is
in this verse, shree krishna has said that it is his energy which has brought about the appropriate physical conditions for life to exist on planet earth. here,gāmmeans earth, andojasāis energy. like all other celestial bodies, the earth is also a big mass of matter. but god has made it habitable, so that, it can sustain life.ever wondered, why ocean water is so salty? god could have made the oceans full of freshwater, but it would have become a breeding ground for diseases. due to the high salt content of the ocean water, many disease-causing microorganisms cannot survive in it, thereby protecting life.similarly, several such amazing phenomena make earth inhabitable to a variety of species, of both movable, and static living beings. nobel laureate and famous american scientist, george wald has written in his book, a universe that breeds life: “if anyone of the considerable number of the physical properties of our universe were other than they are, then life, that now appears to be so prevalent, would be impossible, here or anywhere.”shree krishna also says that the moonlight gets its nourishing properties from him. and it is the ambrosial nectar of the moonlight that nourishes the entire plant life, i.e. fruits, vegetables, grains, herbs, etc.
undying oblation', (with these words) he puts down the naturally perforated brick and offers ; that is
to streams that flow with biting waves to deserts; and heaven is stablished like a firm-set pillar.
12 right gladly would we set thee down, right gladly make thee burn and glow.
with a hundred snares, o varuna, surround him, let the liar not go free from thee, o thou that observest men!
g from afar to thee, slayer of cows, and slayer of men,
the plants that spread forth, those that are busby, those that have a single sheath, those that creep along, do i
agni is connected with the gayatri; verily he gathers all the extent of agni. 'sit thou, o hotr', he says;
upon thee, that holdest nourishment, prosperity, food, and ghee, we would settle down, o earth!
3 whatever dwellings ye possess, o asvins, in fields of men or in the streams of heaven,
3 a hymn, o priest, to him who hears, the gentle, to him who looks on men, exceeding gracious,
8 like a swift chariot made by men who know their art, he with his red limbs lifts himself aloft to heaven.
so may the brace, well-skilled in all its duties, guard manfully the man from every quarter.
death from thirst, and death from hunger, moreover, ill-luck at dice, all that, o apâmârga, do we wipe out with
prajapati desired, 'may i be propagated.' he saw this daçahotr, and offered it. by this he created (the
22 yea, let my meditations, let my songs exalt thee evermore.
2 the fair, the bright is come with her white offspring; to her the dark one hath resigned her dwelling.
they should be offered for one who desires the kingdom; the rastrabhrts are the kingdom; verily with
like atri, like kanva, and like gamadagni do i slay you, ye worms! with the incantation of agastya do i crush
thereby he bestowed upon him power and soma drinking; he who vomits soma is deprived of power, of
being expelled should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to indra, the good protector ; verily he has
the purifiers, shining brightly even as suns, awful of form like giants, scattering rain-drops down.
from the right hand, choosing the gods' attendance, he with rich presents hath arranged the worship.
mind is gone should look at (it), (saying), 'that mind of mine which hath gone away, or which hath gone
6 lord of the bays, come with thy two bay horses, come to our prayers, to drink the juice of soma.
15 o tawny bull, thus showing forth thy nature, as neither to be wroth, o god, nor slay us.
we have served thee that thou mightest give much to us, yea, mightest quickly give great wealth.
11 he beautifies himself through the sheep's long fine wool, like an impetuous steed in war,
rich in all blessings, asvins come ye hither: this place on earth is called your own possession,
sacrifice belongs to the sacrificer, what is unsuccessful to his enemy. now he, who comes to grief on the
.75 sukta 75 – oblation for the suppression of enemies (nairbadhyam havih)
3 hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymns are pressing nigh to soma.
above, thought', (with these words he puts down) above; verily with these he supports speech. ten by
grant us great riches, fair in form, of all good things, wealth which light labour may attain.
.3 sukta 3 – charm against constipation and retention of urine
pressings; he would bestow brilliance upon himself at the morning pressing, power at the midday
8 even now he breathed: these days hath he remembered. concealed, he sucked the bosom of his
he slays the foe and wins the spoil who worships indra and agni, strong and mighty heroes,
thee, strong-jawed! as the homestead's lord, the atris with their lauds exalt, the atris beautify with
we know the father of the arrow, parg-anya, who furnishes bountiful fluid, and well do we know his mother,
these holy songs he taught the bard who gaised him, and widely spread these dawns' resplendent
third, in the waters a third, in the brahman a third. therefore one should put beside him a pot of water
pour on us lofty glory, send sure riches to our liberal lords:
gladly bring yearning fathers nigh to cat the food of sacrifice.
measured, the brhat the unmeasured; verily he cuts him off from the measured and the unmeasured.
wins power. there is an agnistoma, with the trivrt (stoma), and verses addressed to the all-gods;
vishnu in the lofty ruling power, varuna, mitra sing thy praise:
2 for this his mighty deed is visnu lauded, like some wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming;
himself for the sacrifice waxes great. having purified him without he makes him go within. verily
as a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of good deeds,
1 to this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught thou art invoked:
he who desires splendour should offer on eight potsherds to agni and soma; verily he has recourse to
brhaspati; brhaspati is the holy power (brahman) of the gods; verily with the holy power (brahman) he
vessel, for an earthenware one does not hold the offering. it is of udumbara wood ; the udumbara is
19 may we gain wealth, subduing with thy succour and with the arya, all our foes, the dasyus.
22 bring to your agni, o my friends, boldly your laud and sacrifice:
4 when for the sake of those oppressed, and kutsa as he battled,
c thou art taken with a support; thou art seated in holy lore; for the guardians of the ear, &c., do i take
4 agni the god was made the great high-priest of gods, rsis have kindled agni, men of mortal mould.
4 thy spirit, that went far away to the four quarters of the world,
there are ten posts, the viraj has ten syllables, and the viraj is food, he wins proper food by the viraj
3 o god, for service of the gods flow onward, for food sublime, as indra's drink, o soma.
57 the great inviolate are kissing indu, and singing in his place like eager sages.
11 call we on maghavan, auspicious indra, best hero in the fight where spoil is gathered,
he hates and he who hates him; verily straightway he cuts their necks. 'to sky thee, to atmosphere thee,
ten bulls; verily thereby they restored his brilliance. for him who desires splendour he should offer this
these, dropping oil, are yours, o indra-varuna: with these enrich with gifts and help the worshipper.
flow on to indra, soma, carefully effused: let sickness stay afar together with the fiend!
8 and these ten steeds which trasadasyu gives me, the goldrich chief, the son of purukutsa,
from the sin of the gods, and that of the fathers, from mentions of (thy) name, from (evil schemes) concocted
night, the brhat and rathantara prosper for me through the sacrifice.
6 lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who roared aloud, six-eyed and triple-headed.
thou, agni, who wilt have the strong, hast made me the soma's priest, to worship in assembly.
d with the sacrifice i summon the cooked food to thee, o offering.
the rbhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and rudras sung thee as the first.
may we win mitra with our songs, and indra, and. wait upon our lord with adoration.
prospered, the asuras were defeated. in that he puts down the aksnayastomiyas in one place after
therefore the head has nine apertures. the sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds. the three sets of
3 to him these ladles go, to him these racing mares: he only will give ear to all the words i speak.
in cattle. he should pile in hawk shape who desires the sky; the hawk is the best flier among birds;
arise! let them make it evident to the enemy, when (a man) has been pierced by thee, o arbudi!
4 the gods have made me bearer of oblations, who slipped away and passed through many troubles.
4 praise, even as he is known, with song indra the guardian of the kine,
we, when we ride o'er ridges of the waters, will swing within that swing and there be happy.
23 gift of paijavana, four horses bear me in foremost place, trained steeds with pearl to deck them.
lines is these worlds; verily he excludes its foe from these worlds. when the angirases went to the world
f o divine straw, lot me not hit thee either across or along,
in that he anoints it with ghee after it has been piled, thereby is it purified, made worthy of sacrifice and
4 may agni, foe-destroyer, manliest hero, accept with love our hymns and our devotion.
g o agni, lord of the house, with thy ghee portion do thou vouchsafe strength and force to him who
16 far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the god whose home is in the sea17 soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for indra with his marut host:
deities are all the metres and all the gods and the vasat call. if he were to offer them all at once, they
to the parched earth. we ask you to instill in us the same magnanimity as you have, so that we get
they propped up heaven and then brought waters with their might, got sacrifice and in a body made it
ninth for dhatr the tenth; for indrani the eleventh; for aditi the twelfth; for sky and earth the side; for
peers; it contains the word 'sit' (sad); verily he makes him attain reality (sat-tvám). 'come forward, o
13 for, indra, verily thou art the general treasure even of all .
having stated that god’s senses are everywhere, shree krishna now states the exact opposite, that he does not possess any senses. if we try to understand this through mundane logic, we will find this contradictory. we will inquire, “how can god have both infinite senses and also be without senses?” however, mundane logic does not apply to him who is beyond the reach of the intellect. god possesses infinite contradictory attributes at the same time. the brahma vaivarta purāṇ states:viruddha dharmo rūposā vaiśhvaryāt puruṣhottamāh“the supreme lord is the reservoir of innumerable contradictory attributes.” in this verse, shree krishna mentions a few of the infinite contradictory attributes that exist in the personality of god.he is devoid of mundane senses like ours, and hence it is correct to say that he does not have senses. sarvendriya vivarjitam means “he is without material senses.” however, he possesses divine senses that are everywhere, consequently, it is also correct to say that the senses of god are in all places. sarvendriya guṇābhāsaṁ means “he manifests the functions of the senses and grasps the sense objects.” including both these attributes, the śhwetāśhvatar upaniṣhad states:apāṇipādo javano grahītā, paśhyatyachakṣhuḥ sa śhṛiṇotyakarṇaḥ(3.19)“god does not possess material hands, feet, eyes, and ears. yet he grasps, walks, sees, and hears.”further, shree krishna states that he is the sustainer of creation, and yet detached from it. in his form as lord vishnu, god maintains the entire creation. he sits in the hearts of all living beings, notes their karmas, and gives the results. under lord vishnu’s dominion, brahma manipulates the laws of material science to ensure that the universe functions stably. also, under lord vishnu’s dominion, the celestial gods arrange to provide the air, earth, water, rain, etc. that are necessary for our survival. hence, god is the sustainer of all. yet, he is complete in himself and is, thus, detached from everyone. the vedas mention him as ātmārām, meaning “one who rejoices in the self and has no need of anything external.”the material energy is subservient to god, and it works for his pleasure by serving him. he is thus the enjoyer of the three guṇas (modes of material nature). at the same time, he is also nirguṇa (beyond the three guṇas), because these guṇas are material, while god is divine.
3 couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pouring their presents forth to win a stall of kine,
same place, for support. he who knows the possession of the adhvaryu, becomes possessed (of what he
dhatr first; verily he produces pairing with him, anumati gives approval to him, raka gives, sinivali
the earth) from heaven, with a thousand eyes do they watch over the earth.
the teacher by (his own) brahmakâryam (holy life) seeks (finds) the brahmakârin.
5 the great aditya, to be served with wor. ship, who stirreth men, is gracious to the singer.
whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth to the gods. supreme is indra over all.
him whom he hates he should conceive as beneath its feet; verily with the thunderbolt he lays him low.
offspring. 'thou art holy order, truth by name', he says; verily he wins lordly power. 'thou art the past,
5 so with my tongue i deck, to please that indra, my hymn, as 'twere a horse, through love of glory,
yours, varuna and mitra, he surveyeth the worlds and living creatures like a herdsman.
may she, as rich in milk, be drained for us through each succeeding year.
human nature is such that mere sermons are not sufficient for ensuring good behavior amongst people. punishment, when meted out in a timely and just manner, is an important tool for reforming sinful behavior in people and training them in right conduct. one of its goals is meant to deter those in society that might be inclined to perform wrong actions. modern management theory describes very nicely how even one minute of proper punishment for wrong actions and one minute of suitable reward for good actions can rectify people’s behaviors. the desire for victory is universal, but those with the strength of character are not willing to sacrifice morals or ethics to achieve it. that victory which is won by the path of righteousness signifies the power of god. a secret is that which is hidden from public knowledge for a specific purpose. there is a saying in english, “a secret known to one person is a secret; a secret known to two people is no longer a secret; and a secret known to three people is news shouted out to the rest of the world.” thus, the greatest secret is that which is hidden in silence. true wisdom comes to a person with the maturing of spiritual knowledge through self or god realization. a person endowed with it develops the perspective of seeing all events, persons, and objects in the light of their relationship with god. such wisdom purifies, fulfills, satisfies, and elevates one. it gives direction to life, the strength to cope with its vicissitudes, and determination to persevere till the end is reached. shree krishna says that he is such wisdom that manifests in the wise.
if when asleep thou shalt behold an evil dream; as often as a wild beast shall run an inauspicious course; from
13 thou in the black cows and the red and in the cows with spotted skin
28 sweet are the soma juices, come! blent are the soma juices, come!
may the lovely goddess that bore indra come to us, endowed with lustre!
13 agni, atharvan brought thee forth, by rubbing, from the lotus-flower,
17 he whom for furnishing a hundred wethers to the she-wolf, his wicked father blinded,
4 maruts, your mightiness deserves to be adored, sight to be longed for like the shining of the sun.
be propagated.' he gave it to the vasus, they bore it for three days, thereby they created three
4 here sprung to life, they both have sung together, with bodies free from stain, with signs that mark
6 may we be friends of one like thee, o indra, with the wealth of kine,
you. protect our wealth whether in our possession or yet to come. cherish us forever with your
breath is in the upper part; whether he does one, or the other, there is variation in both cases. a brahman
secretly does he offer it. 'thee offered to the lord of the sadas', he says, for completion. they eat; they
when in the rapture of the soma he unclosed with strength the solid firm-shut stables of the kine.
whom dawns shall strengthen when the night departeth, indra whom days shall strengthen, months,
established in the heaven the eye of surya, and caused svarbhanu's magic arts to vanish.
14 rsi, invite the marut band with offerings, as a maid her friend.
sit to thy hotar task; pay worship duly, and serve the gods, devapi, with oblation.
wherewith the sapient one acquired his triple lore,-come hither unto us, o asvins, with those aids.
homage to your custom, o fathers; homage to your anger, o fathers; homage to your terrors, o
causes it to go to the world of heaven. he anoints it in three places; these worlds are three; verily he
2 manyu was indra, yea, the god, was manyu, manyu was hotar, varuna, jatavedas.
5 cast down from heaven on high thy bolt of thunder wherewith in joy thou smitest dead the foeman.
centre art thou, vaigvdnara, of the people, sustaining men like a deep-founded pillar.
5 with mightier strength he conquered strength, with energy he crushed their wrath.
twelve syllables, it is a jagati. this rc indeed is all the metres. in that he consecrates him with this rc,
mitra and varuna with their own share; verily they by day and night make parjanya rain for him. the
as birds start in fear from the eagle, as by day and by night (they start) at the roar of the lion, thus do thou, o
9 like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in depths, like feet for one who fords a shallow.
bright usas was afraid of indra's slaughtering bolt: she went upon her way and left her chariot there.
offer the agnihotra. they performed the full moon rite, as the animal sacrifice to agni and soma .
5 to him three dames are oftering food to feed him, goddesses to the god whom none may injure.
with heroes wins the light of heaven, and is invincible in war:
7 agni, accept with joy, be glad in this our prayer, joy-giver, self-sustained, strong, born of holy law!
that through this famed one's power he may stand by us, even as tvasbtar comes
effused for indra, for his drink, for mitra and for varuna.
the earth which the asvins have measured, upon which vishnu has stepped out, which indra, the lord of
the prime cause of the elements; the one who upholds the earth and the sky; the one who is the lord
fill thyself full, o maghavan, for gain of kine, full, indra, for the gain of steeds!
to help and favour vatsa now, o asvins, come ye hitherward.
heard be our prayer! in thought i honour agni first: now straightway we elect this heavenly
there is (an offering) on twelve potsherds, he bestows cattle upon him with the jagati; he upon whose
while thou art cleansed, song-lover. bring comfort and vigourto the folk,
12 with svaha. pay the sacrifice to indra in the offerer's house:
17 awake the asvins, goddess dawn! up mighty lady of sweet strains!
loud singing at the sacred rite where soma flows we priests invoke
offspring, with cattle, with pairings. he offers to the kindling-sticks as many, to tanunapat as one, and
sauddsas. those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of forty-nine nights, win offspring and defeat
yagur-formulas; upon whom the serving-priests (ritvig) are employed so that indra shall drink the soma;-39. upon whom the seers of yore, that created the beings, brought forth with their songs the cows, they the seven
own abode. in that it completes the metres, it completes for the second time the sacrifice; in that the
pay due regard unto our friendship and our praise. their cars moved onward as they went to victory.
pathway,entrust this man, o king, to their protection, and with prosperity and health endow him.
lead on the wild horse indra with his vigorous grasp forward to drink the soma juice.
32 the kanvas sing forth agni's praise together with our maruts' who
3 all mortals come to thee for aid, the god of most observant mind.
22 this god, with might, when first he had his being, with indra for ally, held fast the pani.
8 sarasvati who perfects our devotion, ila divine, bharati all surpassing,three goddesses, with power inherent, seated, protect this holy grass, our flawless refuge!
the middle he meted out the saptadaça stoma. after it the all-gods as deities were created, the jagati
visnu fumigate thee in the manner of angiras; may varuna fumigate thee in the manner of angiras.
thy in-breathing shall not cease, thy outbreathing shall not vanish; sûrya (the sun), the supreme lord, shall
3 hero of heroes, agni! thou art indra, thou art visnu of the mighty stride, adorable:
he who desires a village should offer on eleven potsherds to indra, on seven potsherds to the maruts;
4 there, indra, while the light was won, the panis f1ed, 'neath a hundred blows, for wise dasoni,
guard of our seed art thou, aiding our cows to bear, incessantly protecting in thy holy way.
then indra, with his spirit concentrated, smote him for ever with his strongest weapon.
overcoming of foes. (he should cut one) of seventeen cubits for one who desires offspring; prajapati is
12 may we, unharmed, serve bountiful visnu, the god who slayeth none:
golden (drops), that are poured into (the porridge), have, (themselves) pure, established complete purity.
12 worthy to be revered, o agni, god, preserve our wealthy patrons with thy succours, and ourselves.
o thou invoked by many, day by day i urge thee with my word, a charger rapid in his tread.
with reins they had to be measured, with outstretched arms they had to be measured out. may thy hairs grow
z at these our hymns of praise do thou be propitious ,
is impure. in that he girds him in the middle he discriminates between the pure and impure parts. indra
the milkers of the sacrifice have sung to him: lord of three heights, thou shinest brightly o'er the
hear this, ye excellent as steers: atri inviteth you to come.
the share of food that belongs to you of yore has been set aside for you. instructed by the rishis bring thou
the gods', he says, for he surrounds the gods. if he were to say, 'bring hither the gods to the pious
16 eager for booty, craving strength and horses, we-singers stir indra, the strong, for friendship,
to indra have the soma drops, exceeding rich in sweets, been poured,
shining, o god, with gods in clear effulgence. let not a mortal's evil will obstruct us.
.5.6 mantra 6: the new and full moon sacrifices as compared with soma sacrifices
5 who was the father of the child? who made the chariot roll away?
thou gavest to thy worshipper rjisvan imperishable wealth, o bounteous giver.
pleased with the corn-blent offering which we bring thee, may indra, friend, hear his friend's adoration.
.8.9 mantra 9: the offerings in the houses of the ratnins
laid aside its black form, purifying itself to a bright (form); the red form do i sacrifice fot thee into the fire.
breaths in the sacrificer. again the viraj is of ten syllables; the viraj is food; verily he finds support in
up stands the grateful-minded priest, elected, appointed to invoke the two nasatyas.
m homage to him of the ford, and to him of the bank.
(earth), the go the atmosphere , the ayus yonder (sky); verily they mount upon these worlds. if the
2 let aditi rejoice and the adityas, varuna, mitra, aryaman, most righteous.
is strength, the post is of the same height as the sacrificer; verily he unites the sacrificer with strength.
2 when, rising, to the sacrifice we hasten, awaking dadhikras with adorations.
m may the sun in the east protect thee from all evil.
still, indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and companionless art thou:
art a lioness, winning (the favour of) the adityas; hail!' they found support here. having found support
therewith delights them. he puts round the enclosing-sticks of butea frondosa, for the holding apart of
he consecrated; verily also he conquers both the worlds, that of him who has offered the royal
3 impetuous is their strength, and keen the lightning of the mighty pair,
where is that ever-youthful steer, strong-necked and never yet bent down?
4 in ila's place we set thee down, upon the central point of earth,
come hitherward by paths which gods have travelled. may we find strengthening food in full
for him sarasvat! pours forth water and butter, milk and meath.
through presentation of our food he grows not old in this his from;
duties; when i am performing my priestly functions; when i am deep in thought; when i am in the process of
come, ye for whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, come ye with love to sobbari.
embryo is dropped prematurely would go to ruin; he should offer before (the others) on twelve potsherds
2 thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, and when the prize is staked:
3 not by both worlds is thine own power to be surpassed, nor may thy car be stayed by mountains or
4 not stirred to anger, come, free-giver, nigh to us, to take this gift of ours, thou who hast goats for
2 may aditi welcome, even as a mother her dear heart-gladdening son, my song that lauds her.
5 both kings who never injure aught seat them in their supremest home,
they caused him to be seized by varuna and by visnu, the sacrifice, they drove him away; his power
2 car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoked, soon guided, first in deeds of might,
2 ye, indra-soma, gave her light to morning, and led the sun on high with all his splendour.
3 fill thyself full, o lord of wealth, o indra, with the juice we shed.
we know, o gâyânya, thy origin, whence thou didst spring. how canst thou slay there, in whose house we offer
be in my strength.' if they omit the saptadaça stoma , his offspring is omitted, but he who offers the
skilled in fair rites, with soma poured, the kanvas light thee, the oblation-wafting god.
wax, bright one, and give strength to him who lauds thee. preserve us evermore, ye gods, with
.139sukta 139 – charm to arouse the passionate love of a woman
to golden indra ever close to his bay steeds, the thunder-armed, the golden one!
in all encounters strengthen thou our prayer to be a help to us.
9 we invocate thee first among the deities: thou hast become a mighty conquer in fight.
verily he makes him go to his own birth place; his food becomes fit to eat. he who desires a village
you notice our sins. may we be repentant of our sins.
at the midday pressing, and on twelve potsherds at the third pressing; verily they obtain and win the
worlds were disturbed . the gods said, 'let us change them about.' (saying), 'o agni, come hither for
in no unready house give us, o indra invoked of many, food and drink when hungry.
for thee the nectar-yielding cow pours all rich treasures forth as milk.
therefore upon the earth do we invoke thee, where heroes win, for sons and kine and waters.
bearing our prayers, die sky's ridge have they mounted, and in a moment speed round earth and
offspring when propagated find support in these worlds, he with his body mounts the atmosphere, with
strong, mighty god, dwell with me now and ever: lord of bay horses, do not thou desert us.
9 god! you have ordained one hundred years as the life of man; please do not cut our life shorter.
by a brâhmana thou hast been blest, by kanva, the descendant of nrishad. thou goest like a stronor army;
thunderbolt within the morning pressing. 'the hymn hath been uttered', he says in response at the
thy bay steeds, indra, fraught with weal tb, consent to come.
may he the true, the fleet, the lover of the course, the bird-like dadhikravan, bring food, strength, and
5 toagni, the invoking priest, offer your best, your lofty speech,
these twain stand fast and wax not old for ever: these have sung praise to many a day and morning.
fashion for us, o rbhus, power and splendid wealth, rich in high courage, excellent, and vital strength.
the oil-anointed bull, agni who hears, who sends as god full hero strength to him who freely gives.
there the staff-bearer found the golden treasure. these things did indra in the soma's rapture.
8 he makes him a most noble form of splendour, decking him in his home with milk and waters.
anything else (can be accepted) at will.' the son born of intercourse with (a woman) with stained
for him, he offered this (offering) to indra on eleven potsherds, and thereby he bestowed power upon
makes him attain the world of heaven; he should throw (the leaf) down in the path of the cattle of him
16 how may we serve the liberal ones with worship, the maruts swift of course in invocation, the
4 rich daughter of the sky, we all behold her, yea, all men look on dawn as she is breaking.
good lord, the father made thee slayer of the fiends, made thee, good lord, to slay the fiends.
15 soma, for indra's drink do thou, led by the men, well-wcaponcd and most gladdening,
bring hither with his bays the lord of soma: here is glad welcome for the bounteous giver.
10 he nursed the infant of the sire and maker: alone the babe sucked many a teeming bosom.
plants and trees the form, the fire the splendour; to his greatness, to prajapati, thee (i offer). hail!
hath the well-bearing mother borne, producing when her time is come.
15 the poison-insect is so small; i crush the creature with a stone.
5 to indra must a laud be said, to strengthen him who freely gives,
as this thy friend, our liberal patron, praises thee, do thou, brhaspati, fulfil our hearts' desire.
9 thou from the curse didst free the mighty waters, and as their only god didst watch and guard them.
earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cast up the gami, that which men were seeking.
9 ye guileless gods, bestow on us a refuge strong on every side,
sacrifices with an abundant offering and is multiplied with offspring, with cattle, with pairings.
4 agni, like bhaga, leads the godly people, he who is true to law and guards the seasons.
dawns, hasting to the praises otthe pious, be pleased with us. both offerers and singers.
he who desires the heaven should offer an oblation to aryaman; aryaman is yonder sun; verily he has
in these verses, shree krishna gives a glimpse into the various aspects of his infinite personality. kratu means yajña (sacrifice), such as agnihotra yajñas mentioned in the vedas. it also refers to the yajñas, such as vaiśhva deva that are described in the smṛiti scriptures. auṣhadham refers to the potency in medicinal herbs.creation emanates from god, and hence he is its pitā (father). before creation, he holds the unmanifested material energy in his womb, and so he is also its mātā (mother). he maintains the universe and nourishes it, and thus he is its dhātā (sustainer). he is also the father of brahma, who is the creator, and hence, he is the grandfather of this universe.the vedas have emanated from god. the ramayan states: jākī sahaja svāsa śhruti chārī “god manifested the vedas by his breath.” they are the knowledge potency of god, and hence an aspect of his unlimited personality. shree krishna states this truth dramatically by saying that he is the vedas.
himself with his hand his offspring would be liable to the itch; if he were to smile, they would
his life hath been renewed and carried forward as two men, car-borne, by the skilful driver.
2 may agni the resplendent hear my calling through all my songs, immortal, keen of insight.
the waves of pleasant soma flow to bhaga, mitra, varuna,
whose divine power the universe reflects; he, o men, is the lord.
surya, thou mountest up to meet the hero famous for his wealth,
7 thou speedest down to succour us this ever-conquering god of yours,
let us not he exposed to that, ye holy! may your most loving favour still attend us.
the magic which they have put for thee into moveable property, or into personal possession, the spell which
in many ways heaven assumes within itself a different form, according to circumstances. it (the heaven) has
they (the enemies) shall float down like a boat cut loose from its moorings! there is no returning again for
down the steep slope, through song, he comes to sacrifice, and he will burst the water-holding cask of
delights him, and he being delighted is purified for him with life. he who practises witchcraft should look
for even mitra mid the gods is angry there are both song and strength for those who come not.
do not covet our cattle, our men, our goats and sheep! bend thy course elsewhere, o strong god (ugra), slay
5 he, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength, rejoices in his place between the earth and
vows, i shall perform the vow.' agni is the lord of vows among the gods; verily after announcement to
27 like a son cherished in his father's houi§e, let our oblation rise unto the gods.
seeking (us out), we shall sing his praises, and prepare (our) ransom. may our two-footed and four-footed
follows the deities . he should not pass over the last of the embers; if he were to pass over the last of
ancient seat', he says; verily in those he establishes them from whom he makes him to fall. with two
may the dawns flushing move me to exertion, and bear me safely over every trouble.
i laud the heroes twain, this heaven's controllers: singing with songs of praise i call the asvins,
full many a wise man lifts to thee the song of praise, and hails thee with a kiss as sovran of this world.
11 inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious hero truly brave.
sacrificer draws this libation, being above other people. he draws with the çukra vessel; (the cup) for
17 wherewith patharva, in his majesty of form, shone in his course like to a gathered kindled fire;
serves) for continuity. he chooses, beginning at the further end, in order of descent; therefore the pitrs
exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify in speech,
7 i travel round about borne onward in my might by the fleet-footed dappled horses of the sun.
in the priesthood may a brahmana be born of spiritual glory. in this kingdom may a prince be born, an
4 him for your sake i glorify as lord of strength who wrongeth none,
8 pressed is the gladdening stalk as 'twere a river: so let the rite, the toiler's power, attract thee
for he the hero, gives the singer treasures: he is the lord who sends us gifts, ye people.
2 let the bull sing with bulls whose toil is worship, with a loud roar like some wild beast that hungers.
4 they harness to the broad-wheeled car the mighty courser whose back bears meath, unwearied,
hini the most bounteous ones, ever united, love; him as ouir friend the men who make all swell rain
for me ten bright-hued oxen have come forward like lotus-stalks from out a lake upstanding.
the ocean is unique in its ability to maintain its undisturbed state, despite being inundated by the incessant flow of rivers into it. all the rivers of the world constantly empty themselves into the oceans, which neither overflow nor get depleted. shree krishna uses the word āpūryamāṇaṁ (filled from all sides) to describe that even the rivers pouring all their water during the rainy season into the ocean cannot make it flow over. similarly, the realized sage remains quiescent and unmoved in both conditions—while utilizing sense objects for bodily necessities, or being bereft of them. only such a sage can attain śhānti, or true peace.
thou by attrition art produced as conquer.ing might, and men, o angiras, call thee the son of strength.
enemy. the gods in the beginning seized these (nights), sharing the days . one took one day, one
the heavens have stood still, the earth has stood still, all creatures have stood still. the trees that sleep erect
17 when the sharp-pointed arrow, o thou hero, flieth mid any conflict of the people,
is born after it as the night. these two mahiman (cups) surround on either side the horse. as haya
8 when at the dawning of this mighty goddess, angirases all sang forth with the cattle,their spring is in the loftiest place of meeting,-sarama found the kine by order's pathway.
of nirrti; verily by her own form he propitiates nirrti. they go to this quarter; this is the quarter of
an oblation of gavidhuka in the house of the thrower of the dice; the sacrificial fee is a speckled (ox)
proclaimed me.' so they slay the fish at pleasure, for he is cursed . they found him; they said, 'come
from the sky, made to fall by vayu. 'to him, o goddess, be vasat with thee' , he says; the seasons are
him who spread out both worlds by law eternal they balm with oil, strong steed who never faileth.
14 o protector devas! let not slumber or idle talk, critical of others, overtake us.
3 this god while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed for war, by men
e the zenith of the quarters; the winter and the cool season of the seasons; brhaspati the deity; radiance
effecting, for our aid, both union and release, indu, like surya, follows closely after dawn.
he streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with springs, when juices poured have gladdened him.
wherewith, rich dawns, ye seek with wealth navagva, dasagva angira, the seven-toned singer?
danger?), those who are (like) dark goats, and those, too, who bleat like goats, all those, do thou, o arbudi, make
4 i have begotten this new hymn for agni, falcon of the sky:
8 let no one here debar me from enjoying the golden light which savitar diffuses.
here let the fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, and there let yama make thee an abiding-place.
the rain of mitra and varuna does not moisten the oppressor of brahmans; the assembly is not complacent
hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who seek the dwelling of the worshipper.
kept secret though his flames are bright seekingon all sides, quickly found.
a thought and thinking, intent and intention, known and knowledge, mind and power, the new and the
a thou art the eastern quarter, the favourable by name; of thee as such agni is the overlord, the black
mahendra has the sacrificer as its deity, the çukra is brilliance; in that he draws (the cup) for mahendra
speech; verily they win the highest (form of) speech. they beat the earth-drum; verily they win that
26 best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise mid beauteous ones,
where there is no chandoma; in that there are chandomas, there is the sattra. the gods they win by the
o valiant hero, boldly win thousandfold spoil with kanva's sons!
agnidh's altar; the agnidh's altar is the invincible part of the sacrifice. in that he draws off the altar fires
we would see thy might, o gâtavedas; disclose to us the wizards, o thou that beholdest men! may they all,
20 what mortal, o immortal dawn, enjoyeth thee? where lovest thou?
b sit on the billows as thy place of rest; sit on the ocean as thy place of rest; sit on the stream as thy
to him; he becomes possessed of a village. he places (the offering) for indra on the ahavaniya, that for
in genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that the brahman easily found the cattle.
he says; tutha, all knowing, was wont to allot the gifts of the gods; verily thereby he divides them. 'this
for ye are they who guide aright our bodies, ye are the rulers of our speech and vigour.
the cows performed that sattra, being hornless, with the desire, 'may horns be born to us.' for ten
secure brilliance. 'the golden germ first arose', (with these words) he pours out the butter portion; the
7 the pious call sarasvati, they worship sarasvati while sacrifice proceedeth.
therefore vouchsafe us strength, o strength-bestower. win like a king: foes trouble not thy dwelling.
new moon (night), anumati the full moon (night), dhatr the moon. the vasus are eight , the gayatri
those, indra, who increase the lordly power, the firm heroic strength of thee the giver.
of life; he is (full) through the plants; the sacrifice is full of life; it is (full) through the sacrificial fees;
5 because thou, agni, jatavedas, stoodest at the world's head with thy refulgent splendour,
buy', he says that is according to the text. the gods retook by force the gold where with they purchased
6 the skilful god who knows all forms of knowledge made for himself a fair form, meet for worship.
bring him the juice poured forth in sacrifice to-day. now range you by the glorious one!
3 son of these parents, he the priest with power to cleanse, sage, sanctifies the worlds with his
5 this soma here expressed with stones and dressed with milk for thy carouse,
13 prepare thyself to grant us that great bounty, o vasu, for abundant is thy treasure.
shaking those that are unshaken, hurrying to the strife, a conqueror of enemies, an unconquerable leader,
9 yea, who alone is called the lord, the single ruler of the folk,
the might of asuras rests on thee, like mitra worshipful in act.
padas, the morning pressing is connected with the gayatri; verily with the gayatri he places the
may agni, he who wakes among immortal gods, grant us heroic strength and wealth in noble steeds.
2 agni, the holy one, the everlasting, who shines far beaming with celestial splendours;
4 indra, when born, thou madest firm thy spirit: alone thou seekest war to fight with many.
i have called upon heaven and earth, i have called upon the goddess sarasvatî, i have called upon both indra
thou art enkindled as the best of seers. help thou the sacrifice.
11 we sought the wisdom of the wise. sakra, kine-giver, thunder-armed!
he bathes in the waters; verily visibly he secures consecration and penance. he bathes at a ford, for at a
6 to him who lauds thee, craving help, most youthful envoy! through our song,
in these worlds. these, (stomas) being sung together make up the viraj , and two verses are
undertake a long sattra. he who knowing the seer, the hearer, the reciter, sacrifices, is united in yonder
6 the hero never checked by men hath gained his strength through indra, he
savitar comes, the god from the far distance, and chases from us all distress and sorrow.
a secret is that knowledge which is not accessible to majority of the people. most of the laws of physics were a secret until a few centuries ago, and many still continue to remain so. spiritual knowledge is profound and not realizable through direct perception. it needs to be learnt through the guru and the scriptures. hence, it is described as secret. in the second chapter, shree krishna had revealed knowledge of the soul, which is guhya, or secret knowledge. in the seventh and eighth chapters, he explained knowledge of his powers, which is guhyatar, or more secret. in the ninth and subsequent chapters, he revealed knowledge of his bhakti, which is guhyatamam, or most secret. in the present chapter, verse 55, he revealed that he can be known in his personal form only by bhakti. shree krishna is now concluding the bhagavad gita. having spoken the eighteen chapters, including most secret knowledge to arjun, he now leaves the choice in arjun’s hands. he says, “i have revealed to you profound and confidential knowledge. now the choice is in your hands.” lord ram made a similar statement to the residents of ayodhya. he invited them all for his discourse:eka bāra raghunātha bolāe, guru dwija purabāsī saba āe (ramayan) [v34]“once, lord ram called all the residents of ayodhya. everyone, including guru vasishth came to hear him.” in the discourse, lord ram explained to them the purpose of human life and the way to accomplish it. in the end, he concluded:nahiṅ anīti nahiṅ kachhu prabhutāī, sunahu karahu jo tumhahi sohāī (ramayan) [v35]“the advice i have given to you is neither incorrect nor coercive. listen to it carefully, contemplate over it, and then do what you wish.”this free will to choose between available alternatives has been given to the soul by god. the freedom of choice is not infinite. one cannot decide, “i choose to be the most intelligent person in the world.” our choices are limited by our past and present karmas. however, we do possess a certain amount of free will, for we are not machines in the hands of god. sometimes people question that if god had not given us free will then we would not have done any evil. but then we would not have done anything good either. the opportunity to do good always comes with the danger of doing evil. more importantly, god wants us to love him, and love is only possible when there is a choice. a machine cannot love for it does not have any freedom of choice. god created us with free will and provided us with choices so that we may choose him and thereby exercise our love for him. even the all-powerful god cannot force the soul to love and surrender to him; this decision has to be made by the soul itself. here, shree krishna is calling arjun’s attention to his free will and asking him to choose.
with infinite wisdom. bless us to becoming fearless and highly motivated. we surrender ourselves o
bowl priest of the maitravaruna, run hither'. he says; mitra and varuna are the leaders of the waters;
three hundred and thirty-three and sacrifices with soma for which he has paid a good price. they put
this is the fair-checked god who, joying in the draught, breaks down the castles in his strength.
thy juice, o pavamana, sends its rays abroad fixe splendid skill,
udumbara wood; the udumbara is strength; verily he confers strength upon him. prajapati created agni;
true, circumambient? what to earth, o agni, what wilt thou say to man-destroying rudra?
the previous verse mentioned that the ahankāra vimūḍhātmā (those who are bewildered by the ego and misidentify themselves with the body) think themselves to be the doers. this verse talks about the tattva-vit, or the knowers of the truth. having thus abolished the ego, they are free from bodily identifications, and are able to discern their spiritual identity distinct from the corporeal body. hence, they are not beguiled into thinking of themselves as the doers of their material actions, and instead they attribute every activity to the movements of the three guṇas. such god-realized saints say: jo karai so hari karai, hota kabīr kabīr [v17] “god is doing everything, but people are thinking that i am doing.”
make a pairing. the sacrifice has a fivefold prelude and a fivefold end; there are offered five foresacrifices; there are four sacrifices to the wives, the fifth is the samistayajus by they make up five as a
3 with stones they press the soma forth, the strong conducted by the strong:
the plants have driven from the frame whatever malady was there.
18 choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, uninjured by the raksas foe,
dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a prince among us, nobler than the noble.
and by (the offering) to indra he bestows power on himself, he is freed from the evil, he prospers. he
a thou, o soma, art the giver of wide protection from hostility, brought about by ourselves or by others;
9 that which the hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, through the air to thee,
strength may ye two, that are rich in strength, bestow upon him; milk may ye two, that are rich in milk, bestow
the sacrifice comes to him. it is a dwarf (beast), for it has visnu for its deity; (verily it serves) for
i. at the trikadrukas the great and strong hath drunk drink blent with meal. with visnu hath he quaffed
let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom to the five tribes the sage attains with labour.
a speaker of speech, and men call him 'lord of speech'. the four-night rite is incomplete; the six-night
upon.(gagrâha) his joints! do thou, moreover, o plant, lead him forth to the world of the living!
fun, fuller, imperishableness, bad crops, food, freedom from hunger, rice, barley, beans, sesame, kidney
for thou with thy surpassing power smotest to death the guileful beast, lauding thine own imperial
25 the pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of soma juice,
.132sukta 132 – charm to arouse the passionate love of a man
like a car harnessed for some great achievement, indra must be the cause of our rejoicing.
constituents is the whole of the sacrifice; verily he sacrifices with the whole of the sacrifice, and he who
born of the waters, born of the cows, born of holy order, born of the mountain, the great holy order.
.16 sukta 16 – charm with lead, against sorcerers and demons
by the prsthas, the cattle by the chandomas. the prsthas are force and strength, the strength, and in
b o agni, with the wives, in unison with the god tvastr, drink the soma, hail.
the good thing which the husband and wife win with the milk admixture;
like a steed urged to run in swift career, rushing like sindhu, who may check his course?
11 yea, even this great pair of worlds trembled in terror at thy wrath,
for support; verily they place radiance in themselves. there are many sodaçins, and therefore there are
without piling the gravel in support, he should separate the sand; verily he pours forth for him the seed
i will declare, while juices flow, the manly deeds that ye have done:
o satakratu, biting cares devour me, singer of thy praise, as rats devour the weaver's threads. mark
hemispheres of the world! the all-possessing maruts shall engage thee: bring hither that (king) who devoutly
5 o agni, quickly come to us, and, glorified, bring precious wealth.
22 flow onward thou who strengthenedst indra to slaughter vrtra who
elsewhere, by means of king soma, we keep within us'; verily he keeps his mind in himself , his
thou goest at the head of the plants, spreading lustre, as if with a light. thou art on the one hand the protector
p o agni, lord of vows, i have performed my vow; for that i have had strength; that hath been
8 sarasvati, who camest with the fathers, with them rejoicing thee in our oblations,
who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside the flowing juice?
so bringing treasure, shine to-day on us, thou daughter, of the sky,
20 what by his morning songs kanva, the powerful, hath, with the priyamedhas, gained71 the herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, have i, the rsi, driven away.
when will the goddesses, the immortal's spouses, the dawns, spread over us the sun-god's
b to agni hail! hail to indra and agni! hail to prajapati! hail to the all-gods! hail to all the deities!
kanvas, tell forth with song the deeds of indra, the impetuous,
down the heads of animals, the sacrificer breathes with them in yonder world; verily also these worlds
10 there hath the strong-winged eagle left his talon, as a snared lion leaves the trap that caught him.
7 drink of the strong pressed out by strong ones, indra, that which the falcon brought thee when thou
he is the first: to him who fain would come to us all pathways turn; he is in truth the only one.
whole sacrifice the gods went to the world of heaven; manu laboured with the cooked offering; the ida
7 she who discerns the weak and worn, the man who thirsts and is in want
roar out as thou art purified, run forward. do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
18 to bring the blind man joy thus cried the she-wolf: o asvins, o ye mighty ones, o heroes,
then he becomes visnu and conquers these worlds. he should offer on an uneven (place), for these
14 when in their terror all the gods shrank from the dragon's furious might,
food followeth close upon your bright appearing when stately horses in your chariot draw you.
8 honour the oblation-bearer, him who knows fair rites, serve ye the household friend who knows all
4 1 praise your work that ye may make me prosper: hear, heaven and earth, twain worlds that drop
the offering'. in that he produces the fire after offering the beast, he brings forth all the gods for the
ye, heroes, have bestowed wonderful nourishment: send it to him whose songs are sweet.
bright, glad, in front of songs they spread to form a vesture for the lord.
3 agni, when, born thou lookedst on all creatures, like a brisk herdsman moving round his cattle.
through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to ample opulence.
splendour; in that there is (an offering) on nine potsherds, he bestows brilliance upon him with the trivrt
earlier in the twentieth verse, shree krishna had stated that he is the beginning, middle, and end of all living beings. now, he states the same for all creation, “all that is created, such as space, air, fire, water, and earth, is called sarga. i am the creator (ādi), maintainer (madhya), and annihilator (anta) of these. therefore, the processes of creation, maintenance, and dissolution can be meditated upon as my vibhūtis.”vidyā is the education that a person acquires in relation to subjects of knowledge. the scriptures describe eighteen types of vidyās. amongst them, fourteen are prominent:aṅgāni vedāśhchatvāro mīmānsā nyāya vistaraḥ purāṇaṁ dharmaśhāstraṁ cha vidyā hyetāśhchaturdaśhaāyurvedo dhanurvedo gāndharvaśhchaiva te trayaḥarthaśhāstraṁ chaturthaṁ tu vidyā hyaṣhṭādaśhaiva tāḥ(viṣhṇu purāṇ 3.6.27-28)[v29]“śhikśhā, kalp, vyākaraṇ, nirukti, jyotiṣh, chhanda—these are the six types of knowledge known as vedāṅg (limbs of the vedas). ṛig, yajur, sāma, atharva—these are the four branches of vedic knowledge. along with mīmānsā, nyāya, dharma śhāstra, and the puranas, these comprise the fourteen chief vidyās.” practice of these vidyās cultivates the intellect, deepens the knowledge, and increases awareness of the path of dharma. additionally, the science of spirituality liberates human beings from material bondage and gives them immortality. thus, it is superior to the previously mentioned vidyās. this is mentioned in the śhrīmad bhāgavatam as well: sā vidyā tanmatiryayā (verse 4.29.49)[v30] “the best knowledge is that by which the intellect becomes attached to the lotus feet of god.”in the field of argument and logic, jalpa means to find fault with the opponent’s statements, for the sake of establishing one’s own opinion. vitaṇḍa means to avoid proper deliberation on the truth through evasion and frivolous arguments. vāda is the logical conclusion of the discussion. logic is the basis for communication of ideas and establishment of truths. it is because of a universal sense of logic that knowledge can be easily cultivated, taught, and learnt in human society. the universal principles of logic are a manifestation of the power of god.
they say, 'if being placed on the kindling-sticks it should be lost, his fire would be dispersed, it would
d in the waters is ambrosia, in the waters is medicine;
like fire (the spell) shall progress in the teeth of obstacles, like water along its course! as a chariot with easygoing wheels the spell shall turn back upon him that prepares the spell!
for cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
in this verse, shree krishna lists the things that disturb one’s peace, and then asks arjun to give them up.material desires. the moment we harbor a desire, we walk into the trap of greed and anger. either way, we get trapped. so the path to inner peace does not lie in fulfilling desires, but instead in eliminating them.greed. firstly, greed for material advancement is a great waste of time. secondly, it is an endless chase. in developed countries, very few people are deprived of enough to eat and wear, and yet they remain disturbed; this is because their hankering is still unsatisfied. thus, those who possess the wealth of contentment possess one of the biggest treasures of life.ego. most of the quarrels that erupt between people stem from the ego. mark h mccormack, author of what they don’t teach you at harvard business school writes: “most corporate executives are one giant ego, with a couple of arms and legs sticking out.” statistics reveal that a majority of executives, who lose their jobs in the senior management level, do so not because of professional incompetence, but because of interpersonal issues. the way to peace is not to nurture and increase pride, but to get rid of it.proprietorship. the feeling of proprietorship is based upon ignorance because the whole world belongs to god. we came empty-handed in the world, and we will go back empty-handed. how then can we think of worldly things as ours?
where grow the asvattha (ficus religiosa) and the banyan-trees, the great trees with crowns, thither do ye, o
two, heaven and earth, not suffer from hunger and not from thirst!
o indra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipito us:
30 who for ourselves, o thou most wise, is wealth and fair intelligence,
2 now whither? to what goal of yours go ye in heaven, and not on earth?
h for expiration thee, for inspiration thee, for through-breathing thee (i pound).
6 thou hast made prayer the means of thine exalting, therefore we wait on thee with hymns, o indra.
he, o ye gods, who prepares a spell, and carries it to the house of one that knows not (of it), upon him the
2 the sun ascending, the refulgent star, pours down his beams together with the dawn.
win both. he anoints with a large handful (of grass); the large handful is connected with prajapati ;
10 he comes by straightest paths, as ministering priest, to taste the sacrificial gifts.
this, verily, is a remedy, this is the remedy of rudra, with which one may charm away the arrow that has one
the central point of all that moves and moves not, the while they wove the sage's thread with insight
sacrificer. now the consecrated person has for long been holding himself ready for the sacrifice. in that
a o agni and visnu, may these songs gladden you in unison; come ye with radiance and strength.
1 the other fires are, verily, thy branches; the immortals all rejoice in thee, o agni.
so bring most youthful one, the gods' asserrigly, the heavenly host which thou to-day shalt honour.
the (pestle of) wood has come to us together with the gods: it drives away the rakshas and pisâkas. up it
sanjay understood dhritarashtra’s concern, who wanted an assurance that the battle would eventuate. sanjay tried to allay his worry by informing that the pandava army was standing in a military formation, ready for battle. then he moved on to tell him what his son duryodhana was doing on the battlefield.as king dhritarashtra was blind, his eldest son duryodhana virtually ruled the kingdom of hastinapur. in the mahabharata, he is described as very rude, egoistic, evil and cruel by nature. since his childhood, he had a strong dislike for the pandavas and left no opportunity to demean them. he was aware that to rule over the entire kingdom of hastinapur unchallenged he needed to eliminate them. however, standing on the battlefield, when he saw the large pandava army, he was baffled. he had underestimated the pandavas, the extent of military might they had gathered was way beyond his expectation.duryodhana approached his guru dronacharya with the pretense of offering respect, but his actual purpose was to palliate his own nervousness. his move towards his guru also reveals that the mammoth military formation of the pandava army unnerved him and he was now fearful of the outcome of this war.the next nine verses are spoken by duryodhan.
o o agni, whatever to-day, o offering hotr of the people,
4 him, whom the heavenly food of these delighted, child of the mist, strong waxing, couched in
over which hail! is said and which goeth back to the gods
4 here am i, look upon me here, o singer. all that existeth 1 surpass in greatness.
pleased with the soma-bringer's skill he maketh him his mate and friend.
then surely, yea quite surely, of the hundred remedies contained in thee, thou art the most superior in checking
4 strong gods, we bid them come to this libation that stands ready here:
8 indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o'er the joyous draught.
sing forth to indu, o ye men, to him who now is purified,
the sun in yonder world. then indeed these worlds became calm. in that he repeats (it) thus, (it serves)
and to sage bharadvija gave protecting help,-come hither unto us, o asvins, with those aids.
4 before all birds be ranked this bird, o maruts; supreme of falcons be this fleet-winged falcon,
was afraid , 'it will harm me when i have eaten.' 'with the belly of the brahman', he said, for nothing
bestow a wealthy home on men, o son of strength. give vitahavya riches spreading far and wide, give
to gain knowledge of the kṣhetra and kṣhetrajña is not merely an intellectual exercise. unlike bookish knowledge that can be cultivated without a change in one’s character, the spiritual knowledge that shree krishna is talking about requires purification of the heart. (here, heart does not refer to the physical organ. the inner apparatus of mind and intellect is also sometimes referred to as the heart.) these five verses describe the virtues, habits, behaviors, and attitudes that purify one’s life and illuminate it with the light of knowledge.humbleness. when we become proud of the attributes of our individual field, such as beauty, intellect, talent, strength, etc. we forget that god has given all these attributes to us. pride thus results in distancing our consciousness from god. it is a big obstacle on the path of self-realization since it contaminates the entire field by affecting the qualities of the mind and intellect.freedom from hypocrisy. the hypocrite develops an artificial external personality. a person is defective from inside, but creates a facade of virtuosity on the outside. unfortunately, the external display of virtues is skin-deep and hollow.non-violence. the cultivation of knowledge requires respect for all living beings. this requires the practice of non-violence. hence the scriptures state: ātmanaḥ pratikūlāni pareśhāṁ na samācharet “if you dislike a certain behavior from others, do not behave with them in that manner yourself.”forgiveness. it is freedom from ill will even toward those who have harmed one. actually, harboring ill will harms oneself more than the other. by practicing forgiveness, a person of discrimination releases the negativities in the mind and purifies it.simplicity. it is straightforwardness in thought, speech, and action. straightforwardness in thought includes absence of deceit, envy, crookedness, etc. straightforwardness in speech includes absence of taunt, censure, gossip, ornamentation, etc. straightforwardness in action includes plainness in living, forthrightness in behavior, etc.service of the guru. spiritual knowledge is received from the guru. this imparting of divine knowledge requires the disciple to have an attitude of dedication and devotion toward the guru. by serving the guru, the disciple develops humbleness and commitment that enables the guru to impart knowledge. thus, shree krishna explained to arjun in verse 4.34: “learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. inquire from him with reverence and render service unto him. such an enlightened saint can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”cleanliness of body and mind. purity should be both internal and external. the śhāṇdilya upaniṣhad states: śhauchaṁ nāma dwividhaṁ-bāhyamāntaraṁ cheti (1.1) “there are two types of cleanliness—internal and external.” external cleanliness is helpful in maintaining good health, developing discipline, and uncluttering the mind. but mental cleanliness is even more important, and it is achieved by focusing the mind on the all-pure god. jagadguru shree kripaluji maharaj states:māyādhīn malīn mana, hai anādi kālīn,hari virahānala dhoya jala, karu nirmala bani dīn. (bhakti śhatak verse 79)“the material mind is dirty since endless lifetimes. purify it in the fire of longing for god, while practicing utmost humility.”steadfastness. self-knowledge and god-realization are not goals that are attainable in a day. steadfastness is the persistence to remain on the path until the goal is reached. the scriptures state: charaivaite charaivate, charan vai madhu vindati “keep moving forward. keep moving forward. those who do not give up will get the honey at the end.”self-control. it is the restraint of the mind and the senses from running after mundane pleasures that dirty the mind and intellect. self-control prevents the dissipation of the personality through indulgence.dispassion toward the objects of the senses. it is a stage higher than the self-control mentioned above, in which we restrain ourselves by force. dispassion means a lack of taste for sense pleasures that are obstacles on the path of god-realization.absence of egotism. egotism is the conscious awareness of “i,” “me,” and “mine.” this is classified as nescience because it is at the bodily level, arising out of the identification of the self with the body. it is also called the aham chetanā (pride arising out of the sense of self). all mystics emphatically declare that to invite god into our hearts, we must get rid of the pride of the self. jaba maiṅ thā taba hari nathīṅ, ab hari hai, maiṅ nāhīṅ prem galī ati sankarī, yā meṅ dwe na samāhīṅ (saint kabir)“when ‘i’ existed, god was not there; now god exists and ‘i’ do not. the path of divine love is very narrow; it cannot accommodate both ‘i’ and god.”in the path of jñāna-yog and aṣhṭāṅg-yog, there are elaborate sādhanās for getting rid of the aham chetanā. but in the path of bhakti-yog, it gets eliminated very simply. we add dās (servant) in front of aham (the sense of self), making it dāsoham (i am the servant of god). now the “i” no longer remains harmful and self-consciousness is replaced by god-consciousness.keeping in mind the evils of birth, disease, old-age and death. if the intellect is undecided about what is more important—material enhancement or spiritual wealth—then it becomes difficult to develop the strong will required for acquiring knowledge of the self. but when the intellect is convinced about the unattractiveness of the world, it becomes firm in its resolve. to get this firmness, we should constantly contemplate about the miseries that are an inseparable part of life in the material world. this is what set the buddha on the spiritual path. he saw a sick person, and thought, “o there is sickness in the world. i will also have to fall sick one day.” then he saw an old person, and thought, “there is also old age. this means that i will also become old one day.” after that, he saw a dead person, and realized, “this is also a part of existence. it means that i too will have to die one day.” the buddha’s intellect was so perceptive that one exposure to these facts of life made him renounce worldly existence. since we do not have such decisive intellects, we must repeatedly contemplate on these facts to allow the unattractiveness of the world to sink in.non-attachment. it means dispassion toward the world. we have only one mind and if we wish to engage it in pursuing spiritual goals, we have to detach it from material objects and persons. the sādhak replaces worldly attachment with love and attachment toward god.absence of clinging to spouse, children, home, and so on. these are areas where the mind easily becomes attached. in bodily thinking, one spontaneously identifies with the family and home as “mine.” thus, they linger upon the mind more often and attachment to them shackles the mind to material consciousness. attachment causes expectations of the kind of behavior we want from family members, and when these expectations are not met, it leads to mental anguish. also inevitably, there is separation from the family, either temporarily, if they go to another place, or permanently, if they die. all these experiences and their apprehensions begin to weigh heavily upon the mind and drag it away from god. hence, if we seek immortal bliss, we must practice prudence while interacting with the spouse, child, and home, to prevent the mind from becoming entangled. we must do our duty toward them, without attachment, as a nurse does her duty in the hospital, or as a teacher does her duty toward her students in the school.even-mindedness amidst desired and undesired events in life. pleasurable and painful events come without invitation, just as the night and the day. that is life. to rise above these dualities, we must learn to enhance our spiritual strength through detachment toward the world. we must develop the ability to remain unperturbed by life’s reversals and also not get carried away with the euphoria of success.constant and exclusive devotion toward me. mere detachment means that the mind is not going in the negative direction. but life is more than merely preventing the undesirable. life is about engaging in the desirable. the desirable goal of life is to consecrate it at the lotus feet of god. therefore, shree krishna has highlighted it here.inclination for solitary places. unlike worldly people, devotees are not driven by the need for company to overcome feelings of loneliness. they naturally prefer solitude that enables them to engage their mind in communion with god. hence, they are naturally inclined to choosing solitary places, where they are able to more deeply absorb themselves in devotional thoughts.aversion for mundane society. the sign of a materialistic mind is that it finds pleasure in talks about worldly people and worldly affairs. one who is cultivating divine consciousness develops a natural distaste for these activities, and thus avoids mundane society. at the same time, if it is necessary to participate in it for the sake of service to god, the devotee accepts it and develops the strength to remain mentally unaffected by it.constancy in spiritual knowledge. to theoretically know something is not enough. one may know that anger is a bad thing but may still give vent to it repeatedly. we have to learn to practically implement spiritual knowledge in our lives. this does not happen by hearing profound truths just once. after hearing them, we must repeatedly contemplate upon them. such mulling over the divine truths is the constancy in spiritual knowledge that shree krishna is talking about.philosophical pursuit of the absolute truth. even animals engage in the bodily activities of eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. however, god has especially blessed the human form with the faculty of knowledge. this is not to enable us to engage in bodily activities in a deluxe way, but for us to contemplate upon the questions: “who am i? why am i here? what is my goal in life? how was this world created? what is my connection with the creator? how will i fulfill my purpose in life?” this philosophic pursuit of the truth sublimates our thinking above the animalistic level and brings us to hear and read about the divine science of god-realization.all the virtues, habits, behaviors, and attitudes described above lead to the growth of wisdom and knowledge. the opposite of these are vanity, hypocrisy, violence, vengeance, duplicity, disrespect for the guru, uncleanliness of body and mind, unsteadiness, lack of self-control, longing for sense objects, conceit, entanglement in spouse, children, home, etc. such dispositions cripple the development self-knowledge. thus, shree krishna calls them ignorance and darkness.
13 whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and bright with gold,
prajapati, in which the soma offering is bitter, to win food; verily also by it he is propagated . there
at this libation is your gift of treasure. let gladdening draughts approach you after indra's.
13 o worshipped with oblations, pure agni, we call on thee as erst,
bring thou the gods, o god, unto our worship: serve, well-inclined, as friend thy friends, o agni.
them both; then indeed did cattle resort to prajapati. for him who desires cattle should he offer this
cake on eleven potsherds to indra, the protector; verily he has recourse to indra, the protector, with his
great name of the manly asura; endowed with every form (quality) he entered upon immortal (deeds).
though, indra, thou art called by men eastward and west ward, north and south,
pressed out for all to see, delighting gods, indu, far-seeing one, is mental power.
charm) that was, will be, and is now present, with this do i ward off thy poison.
7 whom from of old there is not one to hinder, none to curtail the riches of his bounty.
16 defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all sides, indra, shield us well.
indra, as one with mighty arm, gather for us with thy right hand,
ye gave him eyes, nasatyas, wonder-workers, physicians, that he saw with sight uninjured.
he cherisheth with great delight much wisdom, as all things that be, god among gods adorable. may
8 with wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested power and might,
anoints the ladle; verily he places the head of the sacrifice on its body. agni was the messenger of the
swift as the thought, your car hath been sent onward to food of many a sort and dainty viands.
9 asvins, your soma sheds delicious sweetness: drink ye thereof and come unto our dwelling.
of force, two camels; to indra and agni, givers of might, two sheep that drag the plough; two heifers are
6 hither, o indu, bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundredfold:
indra, the mortal man well guarded by thine aid goes foremost in the wealth of horses and of kine.
30 keep us, o jatavedas, from the troubling of the man of sin:
distinction, supremacy over the gods. therefore after keeping the fire for twelve months, should one pile
now hath he come, sweet, robed in vital vigour, and made our calling on the gods effective.
thirty-six; the brhati has thirty-six syllables, cattle are connected with the brhati; verily by the brhati he
the earth upon whom the biped birds fly together, the flamingoes, eagles, birds of prey, and fowls; upon
enter the soma-holding beaker, indu, and with a roar approach the ray of sarya.
19 come hither swift with gifts of wealth - be not thou angry with us-like
for he is bhaga, king, the earth's protector. great is the gods' supreme and sole dominion.
he consecrates him with all the metres. the first quarter verse is of seven syllables; the çakvari is of
grasped it, and sacrificed with it. then indeed was he able to help offspring, when offspring are
for as it were it is a buying-off of a man. or rather they say, 'by agni and soma indra slew vrtra'. in
4 when night was turning to the grey of morning the maiden, surya's daughter, chose your splendour.
6 bring forth the men who rain down boons, o indra: exert thee in the great terrestrial region;
not available to non-believers and those who indulge in sinful actions. prayers and worship by sinners
l o rudra, that highest active name of thee, to that thou art offered, thou art offered to yama.
destroying the foe; do thou enter me with speech, with power', he says; speech is derived from indra;
yea, passing glorious must be your warrior might, not as a guileful mortal's strength.
may the adityas and the maruts shelter us. we crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day.
how, and what love hath he for those who love him, who have entwined in him their firm affection?
six; verily with the seasons he takes him; two have (the word) 'embracing', for the smiting away of the
to aditi; aditi is this (earth); verily he finds support in this (earth); verily also be extends the sacrifice
offspring, and cattle of his foe; he prospers with himself, his foe is defeated.
o takman, go to the mûgavants, or to the balhikas farther away! seek the lecherous sûdra female: her, o
say, 'the gods who eat not the oblations are the bricks' . he offers going round in order; verily he
12 that vigorous band of maruts that abidetb in the mountains, i
they shall become this (world)'; they hailed her in rivalry, 'o all worker', said the gods; 'o deceiver',
5 onward, with ever-roaming rudra, speed the floods: over aramati the mighty have they run.
e the aditya (cup) is these cattle, agni is rudra here, having cast plants in the fire he offers the aditya
and agni, he who blesseth all. the waters hold all medicines.
and that great beast, your chariot-steed, fair, wonderful, makes dainty food. lovers of sweetness, hear
food. the gods desired, 'may we acquire both the holy power (brahman) and food! they saw (the rite
7 he, soma pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the wave of voice, our songs and praises.
victorious in the wood, friend among men, ever he claims obedience as a king.
8 shine forth at night and morn: through thee with fires are we provided well.
8 hymns were the cross-bars of the pole, kurira-metre decked the car:
8 to him the hero, on high days of prowess, heroes for help and booty shall betake them.
41 soma to the gandharva, and to agni the gandharva gave:
lofty, celestial dames with gold to deck them. assuming all their fair and radiant beauty.
g with thy top graze not the sky, with thy middle harm not the atmosphere, with earth be united.
let agni rapid with his rapid, horses, impetuous with impetuous steeds, come hither.
anoints, verily he takes away the eye of his enemy. he anoints his right eye first , for men anoint the
indra and vayu is drawn before that for mitra and varuna, for the upançu and the antaryama (cups) are
release us from the noose of varuna; keep us from sorrow, in your tender loving-kindness.
viands', he repeats, a verse which has not any indication (of its deity) and (therefore) is addressed to
high hath the mighty risen before the dawning, and come to us with light from out the darkness.
3 his chariot shall be glorious, sped by gods, and mighty shall he be,
offer a cake on eight potsherds to agni, the racer, for a race he desires to run, who is fain to conquer
the gods and the asuras were in conflict. indra had recourse to prajapati, to him he gave these victories
5 he, indra whom the angirases' praise delighted, strengthened their prayer and made their goings
forward from the back place; 'homage to thee, o extended one', he says; the extended are the rays of the
7 even from the sky thy brilliant lights shone hither: still hast thou beamed through many a radiant
bestows upon the sacrificer the glory of the sacrifice. if he desire, 'may i bestow upon the sadasyas the
7 no team of goats shall draw your car, o maruts, no horse no charioteer be he who drives it.
the goddess prisniparnî has prepared prosperity for us, mishap for nirriti (the goddess of destruction). for she
steeping the gift with oil diffusing purpose, bedew the gods at chiefest time of worship.
expiration and inspiration. mitra produced the day, varuna the night; then indeed did this shine forth; in
first, indra! agni! hath this maid come footless unto those with feet.
the gods thereby appropriated the force, might, power, strength , offspring, and cattle of the asuras,
go far away, failure! thy missile do we avert. i know thee (to be) oppressive and piercing, o arâti!
mounted upon thy chariot-seat approach us: thine is the sorna-draught from days aforetime.
19 cast down thine eyes and look not up. more closely set thy feet. let none
thee, widely-reaching, homed in sacred oil, invoked, effulgent, have they made the eye that stirs the
for thee, the strong, o bull, hath indu swollen. juice pleasant, sweet to drink, for thine election.
devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food irb heaven,
the (spell) which they skilfully prepare, as a bride for the wedding, the multiform (spell), fashioned by hand,
they never break the gods' eternal statutes, and injure none, in rivalry with vasus.
thou art our father, vata, yea, thou art our brother and our friend:
3 yea, asvins, as a dead man leaves his riches, tugra left bhujyu in the cloud of waters.
2 lead us anew to happiness, o agni; lead us beyond all danger and affliction.
1 o worthy of oblation, lord of prospering powers, assume thy robes,
9 first have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, and got themselves a bride in fair apparel.
then to his task goes the prompt priest foreknowing the wondrous power of gods who must be
2 when shall thy glory as a god, agni, be suddenly shown forth.
4 when from the highest father he is brought to us, amid the plants he rises hungry, wondrously.
9 indra consumeth with the rays of surya the malicious man:
there are two ways of refraining from immoral behavior. the first is to refrain from unrighteousness through the exercise of will-power. the second way is to abstain from sin due to fear of god. people who have the ability to abstain from sinning merely by will-power are very few. the majority of people desist from doing wrong due to the fear of punishment. for example, it is observed on highways that the moment a police car is spotted, people immediately slow down to the permissible speed limit, but when they perceive there is no danger of being caught, they do not hesitate in exceeding the speed limit. thus, if we believe in god, out of fear of him we will refrain from immoral behavior. instead, if we do not believe in god, all his laws will still be applicable to us, and we will suffer the consequences of wrong-behavior.those with demoniac natures do not wish to accept this imposition of authority and regulation of behavior that is a necessary corollary of belief in god. instead, they prefer to subscribe to the view that there is no god and the world has no basis for moral order. they propagate ideas such as the “big bang theory,” which postulates that the world was created by an accidental explosion that took place at time zero of creation, and thus there is no god who sustains the world. such theories permit them to engage in sensual gratification without scruples or fear of consequences.amongst the various forms of sensual gratification, sexual indulgence is the most intense. this is because the material realm is like a distorted reflection of the spiritual realm. in the spiritual realm, divine love is the basis of the activities of the liberated souls and their interactions with god. in the material realm, its distorted reflection, lust, dominates the consciousness of materially conditioned souls, particularly those under the mode of passion. thus, the demoniac-minded see engagement in lustful activities as the purpose of human life.
10 like as a father bears his son, o agni, vadhryasva bare thee in his lap and served thee.
sing to your indra, mightiest vritra-slayer, sing to the sage the song that he accepteth!
10 ye from the old cyavana, o nasatyas, stripped, as 'twere mail, the skin upon
rich in honey becomes he, rich in honey become his appurtenances, worlds rich in honey does he win, he
6 thou hast drunk soma, indra, turn thee homeward; thy joy is in thy home, thy racious consort;
2 child of thyself the sacrifice is for the righteous blent with meath,
11 help us, o indra, when we pray to thee for wealth and hero might.
yoking. 'o agni , yoke thy (steeds)', 'yoke them that best invoke the gods', he says;' this is the yoking
i to the ocean thee, to water thee, to the watery thee, to impulse thee, to the wise thee, to the radiant
10 this newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches unto thee:
13 stand up erect to lend us aid, stand up like savitar the god:
4 even thus have they declared him. famed is indra as conqueror, sole distributer of treasures;
rohita, the sharp-horned bull, who surpasses agni and surpasses sûrya, who props up the earth and the sky,
pouring all glories hither, he, effused, hath passed within the jar: indu on indra is bestowed.
3 to his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and welcomed eagerly the prayers he offered.
8 three are the bright realms, best, beyond attainment, and three, the asura's heroes, rule as sovrans,
by paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send thou us happiness, indu, while they cleanse thee.
austerity of speech is speaking words that are truthful, unoffending, pleasing, and beneficial for the listener. the practice of the recitation of vedic mantras is also included in the austerities of speech. the progenitor, manu, wrote:satyaṁ brūyāt priyaṁ brūyān na brūyāt satyam apriyampriyaṁ cha nānṛitaṁ brūyādeṣha dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ(manu smṛiti 4.138)[v4]“speak the truth in such a way that it is pleasing to others. do not speak the truth in a manner injurious to others. never speak untruth, though it may be pleasant. this is the eternal path of morality and dharma.”
tuft, for men anoint with (a stalk) which has no tuft; (verily he anoints them) for discrimination. if he
indra shall drink the soma, there shall be secure possession; agni shall sing praises: the enemies do thou drive
5 thou art the lord supreme o'er rest and energy, o indra, lord of strength, with all thy saving help.
became (the cup) for the yoker of bays; he reflected regarding it, 'shall i offer, or shall i not offer?' he
4 thou worshippest great gods: bring them without delay by wisdom and thy wondrous power.
gazelle for the maruts; the çarga to the brahman; the hyena, the black (deer), the dog of four eyes, the
has forty-eight syllables, cattle are connected with the jagati; verily with the jagati he secures cattle for
3 hither, o wind, blow healing balm, blow all disease away, thou wind;
so may the liberal lords whose strength is strongest, urged by their riches, stir our thoughts with vigour.
13 come hither from the mountains, come from regions of the sea of air.
in the mid-air establishing his greatness, he cries aloud, seed of the vigorous courser.
'parikshit has procured for us a secure dwelling when he, the most excellent one, weat to his seat.' (thus) the
bestow upon him bounty meet for praises. may he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this most resplendent one,
.77 sukta 77 – charm to cause the return of a truant woman
he mid the worlds his lofty place hath taken. into green plants is gone the purifying.
never, o gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate
love's consuming longing, together with yearning, which indra and agni have poured into the waters, that do i
she brought martanda thitherward to spring to life and die again.
final bath and the cry of godspeed!' he says, to utter godspeed! 'may the fire for me, the cauldron', he
3 full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling together stood the darling's mothers.
sacrificer; there fore no other brick should be put down higher. he puts down the naturally perforated
this earth is (his first) piece of firewood, the heaven the second, and the atmosphere also he fills with (the
sit down in front in thine own birthplace, in due order;
3 o lord of this dwelling! may we be possessed of a comfortable, delightful, opulent abode, granted by
purifies (him) with five stalks ; the pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he
may indra from the front and from the centre, as friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.
visiting with you. he is present in all men and in greater measure in the body of the priest and virtuous
the vessel (full) of liquor, together with bowls of sour milk!
9 i call that brilliant band of yours, adorable, rapid on the car
m thou art a piler round; in the manner of angiras be firm with that deity.
so, the agnidh would consume the soma before it had been appeased; he says the secondary vasat
6 while other men than we with milk chase him as hunters chase a deer,
43 the kanvas with their hymns of praise have magnified this ancient thought
when, fighting for the sunlight, we invoke thee, o hero, in the fray, in war's division.
arise, thou divine person, o arbudi, together with thy army! crushing the army of tlie enemy, encompass them
8 who, with supporting streams and rays that suit him, hath flashed like lightning with his native vigour.
savitar, like a god.whose law is constant, stands in the battle for the spoil like indra.
as thou, o indra thunder-armed, wilt, as the strong one, slay the foe,
to thee for shelter are we come, as to the shade from fervent heat,
4 i gladly, men i with prayer prayed by our fathers have fixed your axle: ye shall not be injured:
bath, o flood', he says; verily he propitiates by this utterance varuna. in the sea is thy heart, within the
breaking in pieces like heaven armed with lightning: maghavan shall enrich the man who lauds h;m.
with agni, the prince with soma; on either side of (the beast) for soma there is one for agni; verily with
