let them then taste this: boiling water and ˹oozing˺ pus,
who will lend to allah a good loan which allah will multiply many times over? it is allah ˹alone˺ who decreases and increases ˹wealth˺. and to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.
and the even and the odd,
and the people of ’ȃd and thamûd ˹met a similar fate˺, which must be clear to you ˹meccans˺ from their ruins. satan made their ˹evil˺ deeds appealing to them, hindering them from the ˹right˺ way, although they were capable of reasoning.
then one of the two women came to him, walking bashfully. she said, “my father is inviting you so he may reward you for watering ˹our animals˺ for us.” when moses came to him and told him his whole story, the old man said, “have no fear! you are ˹now˺ safe from the wrongdoing people.”
and leave to me the deniers—the people of luxury—and bear with them for a little while.
if you falter after receiving the clear proofs, then know that allah is indeed almighty, all-wise.
as for those who deny our signs, we will gradually draw them to destruction in ways they cannot comprehend.
but no prophet ever came to them without being mocked.
we have already destroyed the likes of you. so will any ˹of you˺ be mindful?
do you ˹o prophet˺ not see that we have sent the devils against the disbelievers, constantly inciting them?
but those ˹idols˺ they invoke besides allah cannot create anything—they themselves are created.
he responded, “whoever does wrong will be punished by us, then will be returned to their lord, who will punish them with a horrible torment.
surely the ends you strive for are diverse.
those who took this faith ˹of islam˺ as mere amusement and play and were deluded by ˹their˺ worldly life.” ˹allah will say,˺ “today we will ignore them just as they ignored the coming of this day of theirs and for rejecting our revelations.”
this worldly life is no more than play and amusement. but the hereafter is indeed the real life, if only they knew.
o children of adam! when messengers from among yourselves come to you reciting my revelations—whoever shuns evil and mends their ways, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
he appealed, “then delay my end until the day of their resurrection.”
˹he is˺ the lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, and the lord of all points of sunrise.
and how i inspired the disciples, “believe in me and my messenger!” they declared, “we believe and bear witness that we fully submit ˹to allah˺.”
the people of abraham, the people of lot,
and praise be to allah—lord of all worlds.
ramaḍan is the month in which the quran was revealed as a guide for humanity with clear proofs of guidance and the standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺. so whoever is present this month, let them fast. but whoever is ill or on a journey, then ˹let them fast˺ an equal number of days ˹after ramaḍan˺. allah intends ease for you, not hardship, so that you may complete the prescribed period and proclaim the greatness of allah for guiding you, and perhaps you will be grateful.
and repay ˹allah for˺ your provisions with denial?
then they will ultimately return to ˹their place in˺ hell.
and we surely know that they say, “no one is teaching him except a human.” but the man they refer to speaks a foreign tongue, whereas this ˹quran˺ is ˹in˺ eloquent arabic.
but no! those who commit evil and are engrossed in sin will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.
whenever a sûrah is revealed stating, “believe in allah and struggle along with his messenger,” the rich among them would ask to be exempt, saying, “leave us with those who remain behind.”
˹earlier˺ we tried to reach heaven ˹for news˺, only to find it filled with stern guards and shooting stars.
and patiently stick with those who call upon their lord morning and evening, seeking his pleasure. do not let your eyes look beyond them, desiring the luxuries of this worldly life. and do not obey those whose hearts we have made heedless of our remembrance, who follow ˹only˺ their desires and whose state is ˹total˺ loss.
but when the bearer of the good news arrived, he cast the shirt over jacob’s face, so he regained his sight. jacob then said ˹to his children˺, “did i not tell you that i truly know from allah what you do not know?”
they argued, “will we believe in two humans, like ourselves, whose people are slaves to us?”
just as people, living beings, and cattle are of various colours as well. of all of allah’s servants, only the knowledgeable ˹of his might˺ are ˹truly˺ in awe of him. allah is indeed almighty, all-forgiving.
are they superior to the people of tubba’ and those before them? we destroyed them ˹all˺, ˹for˺ they were truly wicked.
he reigns supreme over all of his creation, and sends recording-angels, watching over you. when death comes to any of you, our angels take their soul, never neglecting this duty.
do people think once they say, “we believe,” that they will be left without being put to the test?
as for the earth, we spread it out and placed upon it firm mountains, and produced in it every type of pleasant plant—
he rebuked ˹them˺, “do you then worship—instead of allah—what can neither benefit nor harm you in any way?
so that he may question these men of truth about their ˹delivery of the˺ truth. and he has prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers.
when jesus came with clear proofs, he declared, “i have come to you with wisdom, and to clarify to you some of what you differ about. so fear allah, and obey me.
in fact, he came with the truth, confirming ˹earlier˺ messengers.
pharaoh then withdrew, orchestrated his scheme, then returned.
if only they had attempted the challenging path ˹of goodness instead˺!
if allah returns you ˹o prophet˺ to a group of them and they ask to go forth with you, say, “you will not ever go forth or fight an enemy along with me. you preferred to stay behind the first time, so stay with those ˹helpless˺ who remain behind.”
if you ask them ˹o prophet˺ who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, “allah!” ask ˹them˺, “consider then whatever ˹idols˺ you invoke besides allah: if it was allah’s will to harm me, could they undo that harm? or if he willed ˹some˺ mercy for me, could they withhold his mercy?” say, “allah is sufficient for me. in him ˹alone˺ the faithful put their trust.”
˹it is˺ a guide and mercy for the good-doers—
they are exposed to the fire ˹in their graves˺ morning and evening. and on the day the hour will be established ˹it will be said˺, “admit pharaoh’s people into the harshest punishment ˹of hell˺.”
we ˹perfectly˺ ordained ˹its development˺. how excellent are we in doing so!
so woe to those who distort the scripture with their own hands then say, “this is from allah”—seeking a fleeting gain! so woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they have earned.
when jesus sensed disbelief from his people, he asked, “who will stand up with me for allah?” the disciples replied, “we will stand up for allah. we believe in allah, so bear witness that we have submitted.”
˹he also created˺ horses, mules, and donkeys for your transportation and adornment. and he creates what you do not know.
allah said, “take it, and have no fear. we will return it to its former state.
indeed, allah has done the believers a ˹great˺ favour by raising a messenger from among them—reciting to them his revelations, purifying them, and teaching them the book and wisdom. for indeed they had previously been clearly astray.
their prophet told them, “allah has appointed saul to be your king.” they protested, “how can he be our king when some of us are more deserving of kingship than he, and he has not been blessed with vast riches?” he replied, “allah has chosen him over you and blessed him with knowledge and stature. allah grants kingship to whoever he wills. and allah is all-bountiful, all-knowing.”
and by the book written
and ˹the clouds˺ loaded with rain,
o believers! when the call to prayer is made on friday, then proceed ˹diligently˺ to the remembrance of allah and leave off ˹your˺ business. that is best for you, if only you knew.
the disbelievers would almost cut you down with their eyes when they hear ˹you recite˺ the reminder, and say, “he is certainly a madman.”
revere your lord ˹alone˺.
and sent to them a messenger from among themselves, ˹declaring,˺ “worship allah ˹alone˺. you have no god other than him. will you not then fear ˹him˺?”
they will reply, “allah.” say, “will you not then fear ˹him˺?”
and they will be waited on by their youthful servants like spotless pearls.
surely humanity is in ˹grave˺ loss,
moses appealed, “my lord! i have indeed killed a man from them, so i fear they may kill me.
and when wild beasts are gathered together,
we certainly know those who have gone before you and those who will come after ˹you˺.
for each one there are successive angels before and behind, protecting them by allah’s command. indeed, allah would never change a people’s state ˹of favour˺ until they change their own state ˹of faith˺. and if it is allah’s will to torment a people, it can never be averted, nor can they find a protector other than him.
and listen! on the day the caller will call out from a near place,
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations, they will be the residents of the fire, staying there forever. what an evil destination!
and ˹staunchly˺ denies the finest reward,
also, the wrongdoers will certainly have another torment before that ˹day˺, but most of them do not know.
then you did what you did, being ˹utterly˺ ungrateful!”
have we not smoothed out the earth ˹like a bed˺,
as for the gains allah has turned over to his messenger from them—you did not ˹even˺ spur on any horse or camel for such gains. but allah gives authority to his messengers over whoever he wills. for allah is most capable of everything.
and those who are ˹properly˺ observant of their prayers.
and he is the one who creates human beings from a ˹humble˺ liquid, then establishes for them bonds of kinship and marriage. for your lord is most capable.
˹as for˺ those of your women who commit illegal intercourse—call four witnesses from among yourselves. if they testify, confine the offenders to their homes until they die or allah ordains a ˹different˺ way for them.
have you ˹o prophet˺ not seen those who ˹falsely˺ elevate themselves? it is allah who elevates whoever he wills. and none will be wronged ˹even by the width of˺ the thread of a date stone.
indeed, ˹the hills of˺ safa and marwah let them walk between ˹the two hills˺. and whoever does good willingly, allah is truly appreciative, all-knowing.
allah grants wisdom to whoever he wills. and whoever is granted wisdom is certainly blessed with a great privilege. but none will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason.
indeed, those who disbelieve from the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell, to stay there forever. they are the worst of ˹all˺ beings.
as for those who commit evil ignorantly ˹or recklessly˺, then repent afterwards and mend their ways, then your lord is surely all-forgiving, most merciful.
o believers! remember allah’s favour upon you: when a people sought to harm you, but he held their hands back from you. be mindful of allah. and in allah let the believers put their trust.
or do you have ˹any˺ compelling proof?
jesus, son of mary, prayed, “o allah, our lord! send us from heaven a table spread with food as a feast for us—the first and last of us—and as a sign from you. provide for us! you are indeed the best provider.”
˹they will also be served˺ any fruit they choose
but no! in fact, you deny the ˹final˺ judgment,
allah ˹alone˺ caused you to grow from the earth like a plant.
when they saw the fanfare along with the caravan, they ˹almost all˺ flocked to it, leaving you ˹o prophet˺ standing ˹on the pulpit˺. say, “what is with allah is far better than amusement and merchandise. and allah is the best provider.”
so orchestrate your plan, then come forward in ˹perfect˺ ranks. and whoever prevails today will certainly be successful.”
whenever someone is touched by hardship, they cry out to us, whether lying on their side, sitting, or standing. but when we relieve their hardship, they return to their old ways as if they had never cried to us to remove any hardship! this is how the misdeeds of the transgressors have been made appealing to them.
have you seen the man who prevents
it is not ˹proper˺ for the prophet and the believers to seek forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they were close relatives, after it has become clear to the believers that they are bound for the hellfire.
indeed, those who deny the reminder after it has come to them ˹are doomed˺, for it is truly a mighty book.
and full cups ˹of pure wine˺,
to allah is your return. and he is most capable of everything.”
these ˹entitlements˺ are the limits set by allah. whoever obeys allah and his messenger will be admitted into gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. that is the ultimate triumph!
the king asked ˹the women˺, “what did you get when you tried to seduce joseph?” they replied, “allah forbid! we know nothing indecent about him.” then the chief minister’s wife admitted, “now the truth has come to light. it was i who tried to seduce him, and he is surely truthful.
then let them groom themselves, fulfil their vows, and circle the ancient house.”
and ˹then˺ thamûd, sparing no one.
and there are others who hurt the prophet by saying, “he listens to anyone.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “he listens to what is best for you. he believes in allah, has faith in the believers, and is a mercy for those who believe among you.” those who hurt allah’s messenger will suffer a painful punishment.
so those who dispute about our signs may know that they have no refuge.
or do you have oaths binding on us until the day of judgment that you will have whatever you decide?
they swear by allah their most solemn oaths that if you ˹o prophet˺ were to command them, they would certainly march forth ˹in allah’s cause˺. say, “˹you˺ do not ˹have to˺ swear; your obedience is well known!” surely allah is all-aware of what you do.”
but no! you will soon come to know.
or to a poor person in distress,
o humanity! be mindful of your lord, and beware of a day when no parent will be of any benefit to their child, nor will a child be of any benefit to their parent. surely allah’s promise is true. so do not let the life of this world deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about allah.
be patient ˹o prophet˺, for your patience is only with allah’s help. do not grieve over those ˹who disbelieve˺, nor be distressed by their schemes.
so that you ˹believers˺ may have faith in allah and his messenger, support and honour him, and glorify allah morning and evening.
and ˹remember, o prophet,˺ when you said to the one “keep your wife and fear allah,” while concealing within yourself what allah was going to reveal. and ˹so˺ you were considering the people, whereas allah was more worthy of your consideration. so when zaid totally lost interest in ˹keeping˺ his wife, we gave her to you in marriage, so that there would be no blame on the believers for marrying the ex-wives of their adopted sons after their divorce. and allah’s command is totally binding.
and when our command came and the oven burst ˹with water˺, we said ˹to noah˺, “take into the ark a pair from every species along with your family—except those against whom the decree ˹to drown˺ has already been passed—and those who believe.” but none believed with him except for a few.
ushering in the true promise. then—behold!—the disbelievers will stare ˹in horror, crying,˺ “oh, woe to us! we have truly been heedless of this. in fact, we have been wrongdoers.”
he replied, “in fact, your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth, who created them ˹both˺. and to that i bear witness.”
as for those who believe and do good, we certainly never deny the reward of those who are best in deeds.
indeed, the virtuous will have a drink ˹of pure wine˺—flavoured with camphor—
˹we˺ also ˹destroyed˺ korah, pharaoh, and haman. indeed, moses had come to them with clear proofs, but they behaved arrogantly in the land. yet they could not escape ˹us˺.
those who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and have sure faith in the hereafter.
and indeed, we chose the israelites knowingly above the others.
if you find their denial unbearable, then build—if you can—a tunnel through the earth or stairs to the sky to bring them a ˹more compelling˺ sign. had allah so willed, he could have guided them all. so do not be one of those ignorant ˹of this fact˺.
those are the disbelievers, the ˹wicked˺ sinners.
the ˹true˺ servants of the most compassionate are those who walk on the earth humbly, and when the foolish address them ˹improperly˺, they only respond with peace.
those who worshipped the calf will certainly be afflicted with allah’s wrath as well as disgrace in the life of this world. this is how we reward those who invent falsehood.
their ruins still lie along a known route.
then and there the believers were put to the test, and were violently shaken.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i am only a man like you, ˹but˺ it has been revealed to me that your god is only one god. so whoever hopes for the meeting with their lord, let them do good deeds and associate none in the worship of their lord.”
and leave to me ˹o prophet˺ the one i created all by myself,
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth so that he may reward the evildoers according to what they did, and reward the good-doers with the finest reward—
do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to allah ˹alone˺? he punishes whoever he wills and forgives whoever he wills. and allah is most capable of everything.
so we cautioned, “o adam! this is surely an enemy to you and to your wife. so do not let him drive you both out of paradise, for you ˹o adam˺ would then suffer ˹hardship˺.
so, i do swear by the lord of ˹all˺ the points of sunrise and sunset that we are truly capable
and so you ˹o prophet˺ are sent revelation, just like those before you, by allah—the almighty, all-wise.
and those who later believed, migrated, and struggled alongside you, they are also with you. but only blood relatives are now entitled to inherit from one another, as ordained by allah. surely allah has ˹full˺ knowledge of everything.
is such ˹a creator˺ unable to bring the dead back to life?
˹he is˺ the originator of the heavens and the earth! when he decrees a matter, he simply tells it, “be!” and it is!
and who have devised a tremendous plot,
undoubtedly, they will be sealed off from their lord on that day.
o believers! seek comfort in patience and prayer. allah is truly with those who are patient.
when shu’aib said to them, “will you not fear ˹allah˺?
whatever ˹pleasure˺ you have been given is no more than ˹a fleeting˺ enjoyment and adornment of this worldly life. but what is with allah is far better and more lasting. will you not then understand?
so we caused them to fall into a dead sleep in the cave for many years,
then when he saw the sun shining, he said, “this must be my lord—it is the greatest!” but again when it set, he declared, “o my people! i totally reject whatever you associate ˹with allah in worship˺.
give in full when you measure, and weigh with an even balance. that is fairest and best in the end.
now, throw down your staff!” but when he saw it slithering like a snake, he ran away without looking back. ˹allah reassured him,˺ “o moses! draw near, and have no fear. you are perfectly secure.
allah will not call you to account for your thoughtless oaths, but he will hold you accountable for deliberate oaths. the penalty for a broken oath is to feed ten poor people from what you normally feed your own family, or to clothe them, or to free a bondsperson. but if none of this is affordable, then you must fast three days. this is the penalty for breaking your oaths. so be mindful of your oaths. this is how allah makes things clear to you, so perhaps you will be grateful.
˹imagine˺ how many peoples we have destroyed before them! do you ˹still˺ see any of them, or ˹even˺ hear from them the slightest sound?
so let them be ungrateful for all we have given them, and ˹let them˺ enjoy themselves ˹for now˺! for they will soon know.
have they ever reflected on the wonders of the heavens and the earth, and everything allah has created, and that perhaps their end is near? so what message after this ˹quran˺ would they believe in?
and then be told, “this is what you used to deny.”
how overwhelming was what covered ˹them˺!
and i am concerned about ˹the faith of˺ my relatives after me, since my wife is barren. so grant me, by your grace, an heir,
joseph’s brothers responded, “the price will be ˹the enslavement of˺ the one in whose bag the cup is found. that is how we punish the wrongdoers.”
we made the day and night as two signs. so we made the sign of the night devoid of light, and we made the sign of the day ˹perfectly˺ bright, so that you may seek the bounty of your lord and know the number of years and calculation ˹of time˺. and we have explained everything in detail.
in fact, they deny the hour. and for the deniers of the hour, we have prepared a blazing fire.
without a doubt, allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal. he certainly does not like those who are too proud.
these are accounts, we relate to you ˹o prophet˺, of the ˹destroyed˺ cities. some are still standing ˹barren˺, while others have been mowed down.
the hour is certainly coming, there is no doubt about it. but most people do not believe.
and we are nearer to such a person than you, but you cannot see.
˹beware of˺ the day we will blow the mountains away, and you will see the earth laid bare. and we will gather all ˹humankind˺, leaving none behind.
and whenever they learn anything of our revelations, they make a mockery of it. it is they who will suffer a humiliating punishment.
he created humankind from ˹sounding˺ clay like pottery,
we made them leaders inviting ˹others˺ to the fire. and on the day of judgment they will not be helped.
a ˹fitting˺ reward as a generous gift from your lord,
so once we have recited a revelation ˹through gabriel˺, follow its recitation ˹closely˺.
surely he is fully capable of bringing them back ˹to life˺
˹this is˺ the truth from your lord, so do not ever be one of those who doubt.
and made the day for livelihood,
i will surely fill up hell with you and whoever follows you from among them, all together.”
say, “it is ˹only˺ allah that i worship, being sincere in my devotion to him.
or ˹ask them˺ if we created the angels as females right before their eyes.
allah does not require of any soul more than what it can afford. all good will be for its own benefit, and all evil will be to its own loss. ˹the believers pray,˺ “our lord! do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake. our lord! do not place a burden on us like the one you placed on those before us. our lord! do not burden us with what we cannot bear. pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. you are our ˹only˺ guardian. so grant us victory over the disbelieving people.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o people of the book! do you resent us only because we believe in allah and what has been revealed to us and what was revealed before—while most of you are rebellious?”
then we developed the drop into a clinging clot ˹of blood˺, then developed the clot into a lump ˹of flesh˺, then developed the lump into bones, then clothed the bones with flesh, then we brought it into being as a new creation. so blessed is allah, the best of creators.
indeed, the righteous will have the gardens of bliss with their lord.
one of the two daughters suggested, “o my dear father! hire him. the best man for employment is definitely the strong and trustworthy ˹one˺.”
on the day the earth and mountains will shake ˹violently˺, and mountains will be ˹reduced to˺ dunes of shifting sand.
and the decree ˹of torment˺ will be justified against them for their wrongdoing, leaving them speechless.
fight against them until there is no more persecution—and ˹your˺ devotion will be entirely to allah. but if they desist, then surely allah is all-seeing of what they do.
which of you is mad.
in fact, the hour will take them by surprise, leaving them stunned. so they will not be able to avert it, nor will it be delayed from them.
o believers! do not kill game while on pilgrimage. whoever kills game intentionally must compensate by offering its equivalence—as judged by two just men among you—to be offered at the sacred house, or by feeding the needy, or by fasting so that they may taste the consequences of their violations. allah has forgiven what has been done. but those who persist will be punished by allah. and allah is almighty, capable of punishment.
˹he is the one˺ who gives you fire from green trees, and—behold!—you kindle ˹fire˺ from them.
this ˹prophet˺ is a warner like earlier ones.
we relate to you ˹o prophet˺ their story in truth. they were youths who truly believed in their lord, and we increased them in guidance.
most certainly, if you ˹believers˺ are firm and mindful ˹of allah˺ and the enemy launches a sudden attack on you, allah will reinforce you with five thousand angels designated ˹for battle˺.
and as for those who disbelieved, ˹they will be told,˺ “were my revelations not recited to you, yet you acted arrogantly and were a wicked people?
surely in this is a lesson for whoever stands in awe of ˹allah˺.
indeed, hell is lying in ambush
also ˹forbidden are˺ married women—except ˹female˺ captives in your possession. this is allah’s commandment to you. lawful to you are all beyond these—as long as you seek them with your wealth in a legal marriage, not in fornication. give those you have consummated marriage with their due dowries. it is permissible to be mutually gracious regarding the set dowry. surely allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
o people of the book! our messenger has indeed come to you, making things clear to you after an interval between the messengers so you do not say, “there has never come to us a deliverer of good news or a warner.” now there has come to you a deliverer of good news and a warner. and allah is most capable of everything.
˹allah said,˺ “o adam! live with your wife in paradise and eat from wherever you please, but do not approach this tree, or else you will be wrongdoers.”
˹he is˺ highly exalted in rank, lord of the throne. he sends down the revelation by his command to whoever he wills of his servants to warn ˹all˺ of the day of meeting—
we have made sacrificial camels ˹and cattle˺ among the symbols of allah, in which there is ˹much˺ good for you. so pronounce the name of allah over them when they are lined up ˹for sacrifice˺. once they have fallen ˹lifeless˺ on their sides, you may eat from their meat, and feed the needy—those who do not beg, and those who do. in this way we have subjected these ˹animals˺ to you so that you may be grateful.
they replied ˹in shock˺, “are you really joseph?” he said, “i am joseph, and here is my brother ˹benjamin˺! allah has truly been gracious to us. surely whoever is mindful ˹of allah˺ and patient, then certainly allah never discounts the reward of the good-doers.”
they will have layers of fire above and below them. that is what allah warns his servants with. so fear me, o my servants!
and do not be like those who split ˹into sects˺ and differed after clear proofs had come to them. it is they who will suffer a tremendous punishment.
o believers! if you are mindful of allah, he will grant you a standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺, absolve you of your sins, and forgive you. and allah is the lord of infinite bounty.
all food was lawful for the children of israel, except what israel say, ˹o prophet,˺ “bring the torah and read it, if your claims are true.”
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sends down rain from the sky, causing fruits to grow as a provision for you. he has subjected the ships for your service, sailing through the sea by his command, and has subjected the rivers for you.
the scriptures of abraham and moses.
indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the day and night there are signs for people of reason.
your lord knows you best. he may have mercy on you if he wills, or punish you if he wills. we have not sent you ˹o prophet˺ as a keeper over them.
but they were succeeded by generations who neglected prayer and followed their lusts and so will soon face the evil consequences.
there they will not taste any coolness or drink,
those ˹disbelievers˺ before them ˹secretly˺ planned, but allah has the ultimate plan. he knows what every soul commits. and the disbelievers will soon know who will have the ultimate outcome.
if they gain the upper hand over you, they would be your ˹open˺ enemies, unleashing their hands and tongues to harm you, and wishing that you would abandon faith.
who then does more wrong than those who lie about allah and reject the truth after it has reached them? is hell not a ˹fitting˺ home for the disbelievers?
o my people! i do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. my reward is only from the one who created me. will you not then understand?
as for those who firmly abide by the scripture and establish prayer—surely we never discount the reward of those acting righteously.
also so they would not say, if struck by an affliction for what their hands have done: “our lord! if only you had sent us a messenger, we would have followed your revelations and become believers.”
they cried, “woe to us! we have surely been wrongdoers.”
it was not until this clear proof came to the people of the book that they became divided ˹about his prophethood˺—
and the hellfire will be displayed to the deviant.
in fact, we have been deprived ˹of our livelihood˺.”
or he may be mindful, benefitting from the reminder.
indeed, the righteous will have salvation—
those who believe and do good, for them will be bliss and an honourable destination.”
he cried, “no! your souls must have tempted you to do something ˹evil˺. so ˹i am left with nothing but˺ beautiful patience! i trust allah will return them all to me. surely he ˹alone˺ is the all-knowing, all-wise.”
and ˹remember˺ when you said, “o moses! we will never believe you until we see allah with our own eyes,” so a thunderbolt struck you while you were looking on.
and whoever is in awe of standing before their lord will have two gardens.
and created you in pairs,
so moses left the city in a state of fear and caution, praying, “my lord! deliver me from the wrongdoing people.”
will you not fight those who have broken their oaths, conspired to expel the messenger ˹from mecca˺, and attacked you first? do you fear them? allah is more deserving of your fear, if you are ˹true˺ believers.
so we saved him and his family except his wife, who was one of the doomed.
and whoever does an atom’s weight of evil will see it.
ask them ˹o prophet˺ about ˹the people of˺ the town which was by the sea, who broke the sabbath. during the sabbath, ˹abundant˺ fish would come to them clearly visible, but on other days the fish were never seen. in this way we tested them for their rebelliousness.
those gifted with knowledge ˹clearly˺ see that what has been revealed to you from your lord ˹o prophet˺ is the truth, and that it guides to the path of the almighty, the praiseworthy.
allah has made interest fruitless and charity fruitful. and allah does not like any ungrateful evildoer.
there they will have whatever they wish for, forever. that is a promise ˹to be sought after˺, binding on your lord.”
one of his signs is that he created you from dust, then—behold!—you are human beings spreading over ˹the earth˺.
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the ˹everlasting˺ home of the hereafter, then surely allah has prepared a great reward for those of you who do good.”
moses said to him, “may i follow you, provided that you teach me some of the right guidance you have been taught?”
and he had other resources ˹as well˺. so he boasted to a ˹poor˺ companion of his, while conversing with him, “i am greater than you in wealth and superior in manpower.”
o believers! indeed, the polytheists are ˹spiritually˺ impure, if you fear poverty, allah will enrich you out of his bounty, if he wills. surely, allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
see how they fabricate lies against allah—this alone is a blatant sin.
yet you turned away afterwards. had it not been for allah’s grace and mercy upon you, you would have certainly been of the losers.
to ensure that the messengers fully deliver the messages of their lord—though he ˹already˺ knows all about them, and keeps account of everything.”
each rejected their messenger, so my punishment was justified.
wherever you are ˹o prophet˺, turn your face towards the sacred mosque. and wherever you ˹believers˺ are, face towards it, so that people will have no argument against you, except the wrongdoers among them. do not fear them; fear me, so that i may ˹continue to˺ perfect my favour upon you and so you may be ˹rightly˺ guided.
with neither depressions nor elevations to be seen.”
say, “if i am astray, the loss is only mine. and if i am guided, it is ˹only˺ because of what my lord reveals to me. he is indeed all-hearing, ever near.”
this is how we make the wrongdoers ˹destructive˺ allies of one another because of their misdeeds.
when people are touched with hardship, they cry out to their lord, turning to him ˹alone˺. but as soon as he gives them a taste of his mercy, a group of them associates ˹others˺ with their lord ˹in worship˺,
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “have you considered your associate-gods which you invoke besides allah? show me what they have created on earth! or do they have a share in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens? or have we given the polytheists a book, which serves as a clear proof for them? in fact, the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusion.”
do you call upon ˹the idol of˺ ba’l and abandon the best of creators—
on the day their tongues, hands, and feet will testify against them for what they used to do.
followed by a second blast.
pharaoh’s wife said ˹to him˺, “˹this baby is˺ a source of joy for me and you. do not kill him. perhaps he may be useful to us or we may adopt him as a son.” they were unaware ˹of what was to come˺.
allah will throw their mockery back at them, leaving them to continue wandering blindly in their defiance.
or have we given them a book ˹for proof˺, before this ˹quran˺, to which they are holding firm?
˹it is as if˺ we have put shackles around their necks up to their chins, so their heads are forced up,
and so it occurred to those in charge, despite seeing all the proofs ˹of his innocence˺, that he should be imprisoned for a while.
and if anyone from the polytheists asks for your protection ˹o prophet˺, grant it to them so they may hear the word of allah, then escort them to a place of safety, for they are a people who have no knowledge.
on that day you will see believing men and women with their light shining ahead of them and on their right. ˹they will be told,˺ “today you have good news of gardens, under which rivers flow, ˹for you˺ to stay in forever. this is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.”
and we blessed him with isaac and jacob. we guided them all as we previously guided noah and those among his descendants: david, solomon, job, joseph, moses, and aaron. this is how we reward the good-doers.
the disbelievers say, “the hour will never come to us.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “yes—by my lord, the knower of the unseen—it will certainly come to you!” not ˹even˺ an atom’s weight is hidden from him in the heavens or the earth; nor anything smaller or larger than that, but is ˹written˺ in a perfect record.
he is the one who sends down rain from the sky, from which you drink and by which plants grow for your cattle to graze.
allah is the one who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command, and that you may seek his bounty, and that perhaps you will be grateful.
we have surely varied ˹the signs˺ in this quran so perhaps they may be mindful, but it only drives them farther away.
˹they will be told,˺ “this is ˹the reward˺ for what your hands have done. and allah is never unjust to ˹his˺ creation.”
on the day the heavens will be shaken violently,
the prophet responded, “my lord ˹fully˺ knows every word spoken in the heavens and the earth. for he is the all-hearing, all-knowing.”
it was said, “o noah! disembark with our peace and blessings on you and some of the descendants of those with you. as for the others, we will allow them ˹a brief˺ enjoyment, then they will be touched with a painful punishment from us.”
why is it when you suffered casualties ˹at uhud˺—although you had made your enemy suffer twice as much ˹at badr˺—you protested, “how could this be?”? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “it is because of your disobedience.” surely allah is most capable of everything.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “call upon allah or call upon the most compassionate—whichever you call, he has the most beautiful names.” do not recite your prayers too loudly or silently, but seek a way between.
and your lord ˹o prophet˺ would never destroy a society unjustly while its people were acting rightly.
then i certainly called them openly,
before them, the people of noah denied ˹the truth˺, as did ’ad, pharaoh of the mighty structures,
for he contemplated and determined ˹a degrading label for the quran˺.
and ˹remember˺ ishmael, enoch, and ⱬul-kifl. they were all steadfast.
and with them will be maidens of modest gaze and gorgeous eyes,
˹he is the˺ knower of the seen and the unseen—the all-great, most exalted.
be patient ˹o prophet˺ with what they say, and depart from them courteously.
we ˹also˺ made them leaders, guiding by our command, and inspired them to do good deeds, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax. and they were devoted to our worship.
surely your lord is the master creator, all-knowing.
without adding, “if allah so wills!” but if you forget, then remember your lord, and say, “i trust my lord will guide me to what is more right than this.”
o believers! eat from the good things we have provided for you. and give thanks to allah if you ˹truly˺ worship him ˹alone˺.
aaron pleaded, “o son of my mother! do not seize me by my beard or ˹the hair of˺ my head. i really feared that you would say, ‘you have caused division among the children of israel, and did not observe my word.’”
when they ˹finally˺ come before their lord, he will ask ˹them˺, “did you deny my revelations without ˹even˺ comprehending them? or what ˹exactly˺ did you do?”
yet they associate the jinn out of ignorance. glorified and exalted is he above what they claim!
they will reply, “allah.” say, “how are you then so deluded?”
certainly, we have made it a quran in arabic so perhaps you will understand.
but the righteous will be spared from it—
with their hearts ˹totally˺ distracted. the evildoers would converse secretly, ˹saying,˺ “is this ˹one˺ not human like yourselves? would you fall for ˹this˺ witchcraft, even though you can ˹clearly˺ see?”
they admitted, “by allah! allah has truly preferred you over us, and we have surely been sinful.”
do they not know that allah alone accepts the repentance of his servants and receives ˹their˺ charity, and that allah alone is the accepter of repentance, most merciful?
then we granted the book to those we have chosen from our servants. some of them wrong themselves, some follow a middle course, and some are foremost in good deeds by allah’s will. that is ˹truly˺ the greatest bounty.
give good news ˹o prophet˺ to those who believe and do good that they will have gardens under which rivers flow. whenever provided with fruit, they will say, “this is what we were given before,” for they will be served fruit that looks similar ˹but tastes different˺. they will have pure spouses, and they will be there forever.
but those who deny our signs will be afflicted with punishment for their rebelliousness.
the life of this world is just like rain we send down from the sky, producing a mixture of plants which humans and animals consume. then just as the earth looks its best, perfectly beautified, and its people think they have full control over it, there comes to it our command by night or by day, so we mow it down as if it never flourished yesterday! this is how we make the signs clear for people who reflect.
if you avoid the major sins forbidden to you, we will absolve you of your ˹lesser˺ misdeeds and admit you into a place of honour.
or ˹those caught in˺ a rainstorm from the sky with darkness, thunder, and lightning. they press their fingers into their ears at the sound of every thunder-clap for fear of death. and allah encompasses the disbelievers ˹by his might˺.
surely we created you, who refused to prostrate with the others.
or ˹is it because˺ you ˹o prophet˺ are asking them for tribute? but the reward of your lord is best, for he is the best provider.
nor do you worship what i worship.
allah sets forth a parable: a slave who lacks all means, compared to a ˹free˺ man to whom we granted a good provision, of which he donates ˹freely,˺ openly and secretly. are they equal? praise be to allah. in fact, most of them do not know.
two god-fearing men—who had been blessed by allah—said, “surprise them through the gate. if you do, you will certainly prevail. put your trust in allah if you are ˹truly˺ believers.”
o believers! do not associate closely with others who would not miss a chance to harm you. their only desire is to see you suffer. their prejudice has become evident from what they say—and what their hearts hide is far worse. we have made our revelations clear to you, if only you understood.
allah is sufficient as a witness between each of us that we were totally unaware of your worship.”
that is the knower of the seen and unseen—the almighty, most merciful,
he has been taught by one ˹angel˺ of mighty power
so the angels called out to him while he stood praying in the sanctuary, “allah gives you good news of ˹the birth of˺ john who will confirm the word of allah and will be a great leader, chaste, and a prophet among the righteous.”
there they will never taste death, beyond the first death. and he will protect them from the punishment of the hellfire—
and she said to his sister, “keep track of him!” so she watched him from a distance, while they were unaware.
everything they have done is ˹listed˺ in ˹their˺ records.
in fact, each one of them wishes to be given a ˹personal˺ letter ˹from allah˺ for all ˹to read˺.
and when the people of noah rejected the messengers, we drowned them, making them an example to humanity. and we have prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers.
give them an example ˹o prophet˺ of the residents of a town, when the messengers came to them.
whoever allah allows to stray, none can guide, leaving them to wander blindly in their defiance.
do not falsely declare with your tongues, “this is lawful, and that is unlawful,” ˹only˺ fabricating lies against allah. indeed, those who fabricate lies against allah will never succeed.
˹it will be better˺ if you ˹wives˺ both turn to allah in repentance, for your hearts have certainly faltered. but if you ˹continue to˺ collaborate against him, then ˹know that˺ allah himself is his guardian. and gabriel, the righteous believers, and the angels are ˹all˺ his supporters as well.
be mindful of the day when you will ˹all˺ be returned to allah, then every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be wronged.
so we answered his prayer, granted him john, and made his wife fertile. indeed, they used to race in doing good, and call upon us with hope and fear, totally humbling themselves before us.
we narrate to you ˹o prophet˺ part of the story of moses and pharaoh in truth for people who believe.
we have not sent a messenger except in the language of his people to clarify ˹the message˺ for them. then allah leaves whoever he wills to stray and guides whoever he wills. and he is the almighty, all-wise.
these are allah’s revelations we recite to you ˹o prophet˺ in truth. and allah desires no injustice to ˹his˺ creation.
that is their reward: hell, for their disbelief and mockery of my signs and messengers.
˹they are˺ the ones who favour the life of this world over the hereafter and hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah, striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked. it is they who have gone far astray.
as for those who repent, believe, and do good, it is they who will be admitted into paradise, never being denied any reward.
whoever is spared the torment of that day will have certainly been shown allah’s mercy. and that is the absolute triumph.
but they rejected him, so an ˹overwhelming˺ earthquake struck them and they fell lifeless in their homes.
“o my dear son! establish prayer, encourage what is good and forbid what is evil, and endure patiently whatever befalls you. surely this is a resolve to aspire to.
he wondered, “do you give me good news despite my old age? what unlikely news!”
surely those for whom we have destined the finest reward will be kept far away from hell,
have we not uplifted your heart for you ˹o prophet˺,
if they were touched by even a breath of your lord’s torment, they would certainly cry, “woe to us! we have really been wrongdoers.”
say, “o people of the book! why do you turn the believers away from the way of allah—striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked, while you are witnesses ˹to its truth˺? and allah is never unaware of what you do.”
“and do not turn your nose up to people, nor walk pridefully upon the earth. surely allah does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful.
but no! allah is your guardian, and he is the best helper.
pharaoh demanded, “bring it then, if what you say is true.”
by a command from us, for we have always sent ˹messengers˺
allah said, “throw it down, o moses!”
whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, we will surely bless them with a good life, and we will certainly reward them according to the best of their deeds.
and made his descendants the sole survivors.
he replied, “i will take refuge on a mountain, which will protect me from the water.” noah cried, “today no one is protected from allah’s decree except those to whom he shows mercy!” and the waves came between them, and his son was among the drowned.
as for the disbelievers, may they be doomed and may he render their deeds void.
˹seated˺ on ˹canopied˺ couches, gazing around.
they did not forbid one another from doing evil. evil indeed was what they did!
and ˹firmly˺ believes in the finest reward,
we delivered him and his family from the great distress,
they ˹only˺ know the worldly affairs of this life, but are ˹totally˺ oblivious to the hereafter.
and ˹beware of˺ the day he will say, “call upon those you claimed were my associate-gods.” so they will call them, but will receive no response. and we will make them ˹all˺ share in the same doom.
but no! in fact, you love this fleeting world,
but those who disbelieve in the hereafter are certainly deviating from that path.
and the mountains will be blown away, becoming ˹like˺ a mirage.
instead of allah, then lead them ˹all˺ to the path of hell.
or are you ˹o prophet˺ asking them for a reward ˹for the message˺ so that they are overburdened by debt?
indeed, we had given moses the scripture, but differences arose regarding it. had it not been for a prior decree from your lord, their differences would have been settled ˹at once˺. they are truly in alarming doubt about it.
had it not been for the mercy of your lord. indeed, his favour upon you is immense.
they will whisper among themselves, “you stayed no more than ten days ˹on the earth˺.”
˹now, we believe that˺ our lord—exalted is his majesty—has neither taken a mate nor offspring,
moses said, “you first.” so when they did, they deceived the eyes of the people, stunned them, and made a great display of magic.
however, repentance is not accepted from those who knowingly persist in sin until they start dying, and then cry, “now i repent!” nor those who die as disbelievers. for them we have prepared a painful punishment.
you certainly have an excellent example in them for whoever has hope in allah and the last day. but whoever turns away, then surely allah ˹alone˺ is the self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
and you are carried upon ˹some of˺ them and upon ships.
˹they are˺ those who remember allah while standing, sitting, and lying on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth ˹and pray˺, “our lord! you have not created ˹all of˺ this without purpose. glory be to you! protect us from the torment of the fire.
when the earth is shaken ˹in˺ its ultimate quaking,
and his people argued with him. he responded, “are you arguing with me about allah, while he has guided me? i am not afraid of whatever ˹idols˺ you associate with him—˹none can harm me,˺ unless my lord so wills. my lord encompasses everything in ˹his˺ knowledge. will you not be mindful?
the ˹true˺ believers are only those whose hearts tremble at the remembrance of allah, whose faith increases when his revelations are recited to them, and who put their trust in their lord.
indeed, your lord knows best who has strayed from his way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided.
the tormented will cry out to those graced, “were we not with you?” they will reply, “yes ˹you were˺. but you chose to be tempted ˹by hypocrisy˺, ˹eagerly˺ awaited ˹our demise˺, doubted ˹the truth˺, and were deluded by false hopes until allah’s decree ˹of your death˺ came to pass. and ˹so˺ the chief deceiver deceived you about allah.
but whoever turns away from my reminder will certainly have a miserable life, then we will raise them up blind on the day of judgment.”
they argued, “have you come to turn us away from the faith of our forefathers so that the two of you may become supreme in the land? we will never believe in you!”
say, “you will not be accountable for our misdeeds, nor will we be accountable for your deeds.”
they ask ˹the believers˺, “when will this threat come to pass if what you say is true?”
then moses threw down his staff, and—behold!—it devoured the objects of their illusion!
if allah were to punish people ˹immediately˺ for their wrongdoing, he would not have left a single living being on earth. but he delays them for an appointed term. and when their time arrives, they cannot delay it for a moment, nor could they advance it.
how we pour down rain in abundance
or do you ˹believers˺ intend to ask of your messenger as moses was asked before? but whoever trades belief for disbelief has truly strayed from the right way.
they ask you ˹o prophet˺ regarding the hour, “when will it be?”
do you really lust after ˹other˺ men, abuse the travellers, and practice immorality ˹openly˺ in your gatherings?” his people’s only response was to say ˹mockingly˺: “bring allah’s punishment upon us, if what you say is true.”
they concluded, “these two are only magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic, and do away with your most cherished traditions.
and who believe in the revelations of their lord,
those who are ˹steeped˺ in ignorance, totally heedless.
the jews and christians each say, “follow our faith to be ˹rightly˺ guided.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “no! we follow the faith of abraham, the upright—who was not a polytheist.”
you will ˹all˺ be ˹divided into˺ three groups:
allah has already ordained for you ˹believers˺ the way to absolve yourselves from your oaths. for allah is your guardian. and he is the all-knowing, all-wise.
o sister of aaron! your father was not an indecent man, nor was your mother unchaste.”
when moses came at the appointed time and his lord spoke to him, he asked, “my lord! reveal yourself to me so i may see you.” allah answered, “you cannot see me! but look at the mountain. if it remains firm in its place, only then will you see me.” when his lord appeared to the mountain, he levelled it to dust and moses collapsed unconscious. when he recovered, he cried, “glory be to you! i turn to you in repentance and i am the first of the believers.”
as for those who disbelieve in allah’s signs and the meeting with him, it is they who will have no hope in his mercy. and it is they who will suffer a painful punishment.
and ornaments ˹of gold˺. yet all this is no more than a ˹fleeting˺ enjoyment in this worldly life. ˹but˺ the hereafter with your lord is ˹only˺ for those mindful ˹of him˺.
and whatever you cannot see!
by the fig and the olive ˹of jerusalem˺,
and ˹as dark˺ as black camels.”
whether we show you ˹o prophet˺ some of what we threaten them with, or cause you to die ˹before that˺, your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. judgment is for us.
the example of those who were entrusted with ˹observing˺ the torah but failed to do so, is that of a donkey carrying books. how evil is the example of those who reject allah’s signs! for allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
they have taken their rabbis and monks as well as the messiah, son of mary, as lords besides allah, even though they were commanded to worship none but one god. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. glorified is he above what they associate ˹with him˺!
and allah brought you out of the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing, and gave you hearing, sight, and intellect so perhaps you would be thankful.
so because of their sins, they were drowned, then admitted into the fire. and they found none to help them against allah.
then we brought you back to life after your death, so that perhaps you would be grateful.
allah responded, “we will assist you with your brother and grant you both authority, so they cannot harm you. with our signs, you and those who follow you will ˹certainly˺ prevail.”
o messenger! convey everything revealed to you from your lord. if you do not, then you have not delivered his message. allah will ˹certainly˺ protect you from the people. indeed, allah does not guide the people who disbelieve.
whatever palm trees you ˹believers˺ cut down or left standing intact, it was ˹all˺ by allah’s will, so that he might disgrace the rebellious.
believers should not take disbelievers as guardians instead of the believers—and whoever does so will have nothing to hope for from allah—unless it is a precaution against their tyranny. and allah warns you about himself. and to allah is the final return.
nor can you say, “if only the scriptures had been revealed to us, we would have been better guided than they.” now there has come to you from your lord a clear proof—a guide and mercy. who then does more wrong than those who deny allah’s revelations and turn away from them? we will reward those who turn away from our revelations with a dreadful punishment for turning away.
say, “are you awaiting anything to befall us except one of the two best things: ˹victory or martyrdom˺? but we are awaiting allah to afflict you with torment either from him or at our hands. so keep waiting! we too are waiting with you.”
it is not the prose of a poet ˹as you claim˺, ˹yet˺ you hardly have any faith.
surely this ˹quran˺ is only a reminder to the whole world—
when tormented, they pleaded, “o moses! pray to your lord on our behalf, by virtue of the covenant he made with you. if you help remove this torment from us, we will certainly believe in you and let the children of israel go with you.”
those who have no knowledge say, “if only allah would speak to us or a sign would come to us!” the same was said by those who came before. their hearts are all alike. indeed, we have made the signs clear for people of sure faith.
so the magicians disputed the matter among themselves, conversing privately.
˹watch for˺ the day ˹when˺ the disbelievers will be exposed to the fire. ˹they will be told,˺ “you ˹already˺ exhausted your ˹share of˺ pleasures during your worldly life, and ˹fully˺ enjoyed them. so today you will be rewarded with the torment of disgrace for your arrogance throughout the land with no right, and for your rebelliousness.”
you see many of them racing towards sin, transgression, and consumption of forbidden gain. evil indeed are their actions!
and the two among you who commit this sin—discipline them. if they repent and mend their ways, relieve them. surely allah is ever accepting of repentance, most merciful.
and we appointed for him—out of our grace—his brother, aaron, as a prophet.
so do not be in haste against them, for indeed we are ˹closely˺ counting down their days.
then no one can deny it has come.
neither their wealth nor children will be of any help to them against allah whatsoever. it is they who will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.
but when moses came to them with our clear signs, they said ˹arrogantly˺, “this is nothing but conjured magic ˹tricks˺. we have never heard of this in ˹the history of˺ our forefathers.”
for a tremendous day—
their reward with their lord will be gardens of eternity, under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with him. this is ˹only˺ for those in awe of their lord.
they will be reclining on thrones, ˹neatly˺ lined up ˹facing each other˺. and we will pair them to maidens with gorgeous eyes.
still they would say, “our eyes have truly been dazzled! in fact, we must have been bewitched.”
surely the day of ˹final˺ decision is the time appointed for all—
when he arrived at the well of midian, he found a group of people watering ˹their herds˺. apart from them, he noticed two women holding back ˹their herd˺. he asked ˹them˺, “what is the problem?” they replied, “we cannot water ˹our animals˺ until the ˹other˺ shepherds are done, for our father is a very old man.”
but the hearts of those ˹who disbelieve˺ are oblivious to ˹all of˺ this, and they have other ˹evil˺ deeds, opposite to this, in which they are engrossed.
we caused you to deviate, for we ourselves were deviant.”
˹joyfully˺ receiving what their lord will grant them. before this ˹reward˺ they were truly good-doers ˹in the world˺:
they fear their lord above them, and do whatever they are commanded.
surely the first house ˹of worship˺ established for humanity is the one at bakkah—a blessed sanctuary and a guide for ˹all˺ people.
and so the enemies could neither scale nor tunnel through it.
yet when it descends upon them: how evil will that morning be for those who had been warned!
on that day no intercession will be of any benefit, except by those granted permission by the most compassionate and whose words are agreeable to him.
so we answered his prayer and removed his adversity, and gave him back his family, twice as many, as a mercy from us and a lesson for the ˹devoted˺ worshippers.
˹this is˺ also so that those gifted with knowledge would know that this ˹revelation˺ is the truth from your lord, so they have faith in it, and so their hearts would submit humbly to it. and allah surely guides the believers to the straight path.
in fact, we hurl the truth against falsehood, leaving it crushed, and it quickly vanishes. and woe be to you for what you claim!
when she heard about their gossip, and exclaimed, “good god! this cannot be human; this must be a noble angel!”
˹they will be˺ amid thornless lote trees,
he is the one who expelled the disbelievers of the people of the book from their homes for ˹their˺ first banishment ˹ever˺. you never thought they would go. and they thought their strongholds would put them out of allah’s reach. but ˹the decree of˺ allah came upon them from where they never expected. and he cast horror into their hearts so they destroyed their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers. so take a lesson ˹from this˺, o people of insight!
brute, and—on top of all that—an illegitimate child.
he is the one who created for you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹yet˺ you hardly give any thanks.
indeed, it is a tree that grows in the depths of hell,
and those delivering revelation,
there is no doubt that whatever ˹idols˺ you invite me to ˹worship˺ are not worthy to be invoked either in this world or the hereafter. ˹undoubtedly,˺ our return is to allah, and the transgressors will be the inmates of the fire.
except an old woman, who was one of the doomed.
i do believe in your lord, so listen to me.”
that this is truly a noble quran,
indeed, there is more fear in their hearts for you ˹believers˺ than for allah. that is because they are a people who do not comprehend.
make me one of those awarded the garden of bliss.
and will return to their people joyfully.
let people then consider what they were created from!
˹in the end,˺ the prophet said, “my lord! judge ˹between us˺ in truth. and our lord is the most compassionate, whose help is sought against what you claim.”
if only we could have a second chance, then we would be believers.”
˹he is˺ the originator of the heavens and the earth. he has made for you spouses from among yourselves, and ˹made˺ mates for cattle ˹as well˺—multiplying you ˹both˺. there is nothing like him, for he ˹alone˺ is the all-hearing, all-seeing.
there is none in the heavens or the earth who will not return to the most compassionate in full submission.
and if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will definitely say, “allah!” say, “praise be to allah!” in fact, most of them do not know.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “your soul will be taken by the angel of death, who is in charge of you. then to your lord you will ˹all˺ be returned.”
if you desire to replace a wife with another and you have given the former ˹even˺ a stack of gold ˹as a dowry˺, do not take any of it back. would you ˹still˺ take it unjustly and very sinfully?
we blessed him and isaac as well. some of their descendants did good, while others clearly wronged themselves.
why do you not believe in allah while the messenger is inviting you to have faith in your lord, although he has already taken your covenant, if you will ever believe.
and who enforce justice when wronged.
we will facilitate for you the way of ease.
he used to urge his people to pray and give alms-tax. and his lord was well pleased with him.
o believers! when you are told to make room in gatherings, then do so. allah will make room for you ˹in his grace˺. and if you are told to rise, then do so. allah will elevate those of you who are faithful, and ˹raise˺ those gifted with knowledge in rank. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
“peace be upon noah among all peoples.”
our lord! forgive me, my parents, and the believers on the day when the judgment will come to pass.”
he brought their hearts together. had you spent all the riches in the earth, you could not have united their hearts. but allah has united them. indeed, he is almighty, all-wise.
we come to you with the truth, and we are certainly truthful.
˹through which˺ the angels and the ˹holy˺ spirit
call ˹all˺ people to the pilgrimage. they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel from every distant path,
“˹they are˺ the ones who follow the messenger, the unlettered prophet, whose description they find in their torah and the gospel. he commands them to do good and forbids them from evil, permits for them what is lawful and forbids to them what is impure, and relieves them from their burdens and the shackles that bound them. ˹only˺ those who believe in him, honour and support him, and follow the light sent down to him will be successful.”
and guard yourselves against the day when no soul will be of any help to another. no ransom will be taken, no intercession accepted, and no help will be given.
and what will make you realize what sijjin is?—
allah selects messengers from both angels and people, for allah is truly all-hearing, all-seeing.
except those who repent afterwards and mend their ways, then surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
and ˹remember˺ when satan made their ˹evil˺ deeds appealing to them, and said, “no one can overcome you today. i am surely by your side.” but when the two forces faced off, he cowered and said, “i have absolutely nothing to do with you. i certainly see what you do not see. i truly fear allah, for allah is severe in punishment.”
moses responded, “is this what you say about the truth when it has come to you? is this magic? magicians will never succeed.”
or do they have access to ˹the record in˺ the unseen, so they copy it ˹for all to see˺?
indeed, we sent moses with our signs and compelling proof
as for those who believe, do good, and have faith in what has been revealed to muhammad—which is the truth from their lord—he will absolve them of their sins and improve their condition.
they will make excuses to you ˹believers˺ when you return to them. say, “make no excuses, ˹for˺ we will not believe you. allah has already informed us about your ˹true˺ state ˹of faith˺. your ˹future˺ deeds will be observed by allah and his messenger as well. and you will be returned to the knower of the seen and unseen, then he will inform you of what you used to do.”
from the evil of whatever he has created,
so their homes are there, ˹but completely˺ ruined because of their wrongdoing. surely in this is a lesson for people of knowledge.
had the people of the book only been faithful and mindful ˹of allah˺, we would have certainly absolved them of their sins and admitted them into the gardens of bliss.
those who stayed behind will say, when you ˹believers˺ set out to take the spoils of war, “let us accompany you.” they wish to change allah’s promise. the truth is: they can hardly comprehend.
˹it is˺ a guide and good news for the believers:
˹remember˺ how we delivered you from the people of pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful torment, slaughtering your sons and keeping your women. that was a severe test from your lord.
so be patient ˹o prophet˺, ˹for˺ allah’s promise is certainly true. seek forgiveness for your shortcomings. and glorify the praises of your lord morning and evening.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹whether you˺ donate willingly or unwillingly, it will never be accepted from you, for you have been a rebellious people.”
melting whatever is in their bellies, along with their skin.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. and allah is sufficient as a trustee of affairs.
but they turned away. so we sent against them a devastating flood, and replaced their orchards with two others producing bitter fruit, fruitless bushes,
whoever thinks that allah will not help his prophet in this world and the hereafter, let them stretch out a rope to the ceiling and strangle themselves, then let them see if this plan will do away with ˹the cause of˺ their rage.
on that day all will end up before your lord.
placing the moon within them as a ˹reflected˺ light, and the sun as a ˹radiant˺ lamp?
and to him belong all those in the heavens and the earth—all are subject to his will.
allah responded, “soon they will be truly regretful.”
they are the ones whose deeds are wasted in this world and the hereafter. and they will have no helpers.
and the people of the right—how ˹blessed˺ will they be!
allah said, “o moses! i have ˹already˺ elevated you above all others by my messages and speech. so hold firmly to what i have given you and be grateful.”
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign, and gave them refuge on high ground—a ˹suitable˺ place for rest with flowing water.
he has only forbidden you ˹to eat˺ carrion, blood, swine, and what is slaughtered in the name of any other than allah. but if someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate need—they will not be sinful. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
until the appointed day.”
who do not speak until he has spoken, ˹only˺ acting at his command.
you will certainly pass from one state to another.
indeed, we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they ˹all˺ declined to bear it, being fearful of it. but humanity assumed it, ˹for˺ they are truly wrongful ˹to themselves˺ and ignorant ˹of the consequences˺,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “most certainly, earlier and later generations
this worldly life is no more than play and amusement. but if you are faithful and mindful ˹of allah˺, he will grant you your ˹full˺ reward, and will not ask you ˹to donate all˺ your wealth.
but no! the wicked are certainly bound for sijjin ˹in the depths of hell˺—
and love wealth fervently.
allah has indeed purchased from the believers their lives and wealth in exchange for paradise. they fight in the cause of allah and kill or are killed. this is a true promise binding on him in the torah, the gospel, and the quran. and whose promise is truer than allah’s? so rejoice in the exchange you have made with him. that is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.
those ˹are the same people˺ who say, “allah has commanded us not to believe in any messenger unless he brings us an offering to be consumed by fire ˹from the sky˺.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “other prophets did in fact come to you before me with clear proofs and ˹even˺ what you demanded—why then did you kill them, if what you say is true?”
˹remember˺ when your lord said to the angels, “i am going to place a successive ˹human˺ authority on earth.” they asked ˹allah˺, “will you place in it someone who will spread corruption there and shed blood while we glorify your praises and proclaim your holiness?” allah responded, “i know what you do not know.”
a group among the people of the book said ˹to one another˺, “believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and reject it in the evening, so they may abandon their faith.
indeed, those who disbelieve after having believed then increase in disbelief, their repentance will never be accepted. it is they who are astray.
it is not for the sun to catch up with the moon, nor does the night outrun the day. each is travelling in an orbit of their own.
how despicable it is in the sight of allah that you say what you do not do!
and he left this enduring declaration among his descendants, so they may ˹always˺ turn back ˹to allah˺.
˹it is to˺ have faith in allah and his messenger, and strive in the cause of allah with your wealth and your lives. that is best for you, if only you knew.
i do not worship what you worship,
˹o believers!˺ do not insult what they invoke besides allah or they will insult allah spitefully out of ignorance. this is how we have made each people’s deeds appealing to them. then to their lord is their return, and he will inform them of what they used to do.
but it is simply a reminder to the whole world.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “shall i inform you of those who deserve a worse punishment from allah ˹than the rebellious˺? it is those who earned allah’s condemnation and displeasure—some being reduced to apes and pigs and worshippers of false gods. these are far worse in rank and farther astray from the right way.”
he is the one who created you, yet some of you are disbelievers while some are believers. and allah is all-seeing of what you do.
there the deviant will cry while disputing with their idols,
the gardens of eternity which they will enter, under which rivers flow. in it they will have whatever they desire. this is how allah rewards the righteous—
has he taken ˹angels as his˺ daughters from what he created, and favoured you ˹o pagans˺ with sons?
those blind ˹to the truth˺ and those who can see are not equal, nor are those who believe and do good ˹equal˺ to those who do evil. yet you are hardly mindful.
ask ˹the followers of˺ the messengers that we already sent before you if we ˹ever˺ appointed ˹other˺ gods to be worshipped besides the most compassionate.
and they brought his shirt, stained with false blood. it is allah’s help that i seek to bear your claims.”
˹he is the˺ lord of the east and the west. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him, so take him ˹alone˺ as a trustee of affairs.
he only incites you to commit evil and indecency, and to claim against allah what you do not know.
you ˹o prophet˺ will certainly die, and they will die too.
and those who shun the worship of false gods, turning to allah ˹alone˺, will have good news. so give good news to my servants ˹o prophet˺—
they replied, “no! but we found our forefathers doing the same.”
previously, as a guide for people, and ˹also˺ revealed the standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺. surely those who reject allah’s revelations will suffer a severe torment. for allah is almighty, capable of punishment.
he is the one who has made the night for you to rest in and the day bright. surely in this are signs for people who listen.
did he not find you as an orphan then sheltered you?
are those who seek allah’s pleasure like those who deserve allah’s wrath? hell is their home. what an evil destination!
in fact, the disbelievers persist in denial.
those ˹elite˺ have already led many astray. so ˹o lord˺, only allow the wrongdoers to stray farther away.”
and the night when it passes!
who then believed ˹in him˺, so we allowed them enjoyment for a while.
the ˹prophet’s˺ heart did not doubt what he saw.
on that day some faces will be bright while others gloomy. to the gloomy-faced it will be said, “did you disbelieve after having believed? so taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
and ˹remember, o prophet˺ when we told you, “certainly your lord encompasses the people.” and we have made what we brought you to see only as a test for the people. we keep warning them, but it only increases them greatly in defiance.
so he watered ˹their herd˺ for them, then withdrew to the shade and prayed, “my lord! i am truly in ˹desperate˺ need of whatever provision you may have in store for me.”
then he travelled a ˹third˺ course
from which you ˹pagans˺ are turning away.”
the disbelievers among the children of israel were condemned in the revelations of david and jesus, son of mary. that was for their disobedience and violations.
and ˹remember˺ when moses prayed for water for his people, we said, “strike the rock with your staff.” then twelve springs gushed out, ˹and˺ each tribe knew its drinking place. ˹we then said,˺ “eat and drink of allah’s provisions, and do not go about spreading corruption in the land.”
but here you are, killing each other and expelling some of your people from their homes, aiding one another in sin and aggression; and when those ˹expelled˺ come to you as captives, you still ransom them—though expelling them was unlawful for you. do you believe in some of the scripture and reject the rest? is there any reward for those who do so among you other than disgrace in this worldly life and being subjected to the harshest punishment on the day of judgment? for allah is never unaware of what you do.
or have they taken other gods besides him? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “show ˹me˺ your proof. here is ˹the quran,˺ the reminder for those with me; along with ˹earlier scriptures,˺ the reminder for those before me.” but most of them do not know the truth, so they turn away.
no calamity befalls ˹anyone˺ except by allah’s will. and whoever has faith in allah, he will ˹rightly˺ guide their hearts ˹through adversity˺. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
that they would surely be helped,
those who believed, emigrated, and strived with their wealth and lives in the cause of allah, as well as those who gave them shelter and help—they are truly guardians of one another. as for those who believed but did not emigrate, you have no obligations to them until they emigrate. but if they seek your help ˹against persecution˺ in faith, it is your obligation to help them, except against people bound with you in a treaty. allah is all-seeing of what you do.
˹they deserve to be˺ condemned. ˹if they were to persist,˺ they would get themselves seized and killed relentlessly wherever they are found!
and he destroyed the first ˹people of˺ ’ȃd,
so hold firmly to what has been revealed to you ˹o prophet˺. you are truly on the straight path.
and refuse to give ˹even the simplest˺ aid.
then we saved our messengers and those who believed. for it is our duty to save the believers.
and the night as it retreats,
then in the footsteps of these ˹prophets˺, we sent our messengers, and ˹after them˺ we sent jesus, son of mary, and granted him the gospel, and instilled compassion and mercy into the hearts of his followers. as for monasticism, they made it up—we never ordained it for them—only seeking to please allah, yet they did not ˹even˺ observe it strictly. so we rewarded those of them who were faithful. but most of them are rebellious.
and say, “i am truly sent with a clear warning”—
moses responded, “˹then˺ it is ˹settled˺ between you and i. whichever term i fulfill, there will be no ˹further˺ obligation on me. and allah is a witness to what we say.”
this is because they defied allah and his messenger. and whoever defies allah, then allah is truly severe in punishment.
˹but˺ you will surely see the hellfire.
indeed, we have sent messengers before you ˹o prophet˺ to other people who we put through suffering and adversity ˹for their denial˺, so perhaps they would be humbled.
ask, ˹o prophet,˺ “who has forbidden the adornments and lawful provisions allah has brought forth for his servants?” say, “they are for the enjoyment of the believers in this worldly life, but they will be exclusively theirs on the day of judgment. this is how we make our revelations clear for people of knowledge.”
although every sign we showed them was greater than the one before.
do they not see that we gradually reduce their land from its borders? allah decides—none can reverse his decision. and he is swift in reckoning.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “had there been other gods besides him—as they claim—then they would have certainly sought a way to ˹challenge˺ the lord of the throne.”
˹they are˺ the ones who reject this book and all ˹scriptures˺ we sent our messengers with. so they will know ˹the consequences˺
or a treasure had been cast down to him, or he had had a garden from which he may eat!” and the wrongdoers say ˹to the believers˺, “you are only following a bewitched man.”
have you not seen that allah created the heavens and the earth for a reason? if he wills, he can eliminate you and produce a new creation.
had the truth followed their desires, the heavens, the earth, and all those in them would have certainly been corrupted. in fact, we have brought them ˹the means to˺ their glory, but they turn away from it.
created humans from a clinging clot.
so she pointed to the baby. they exclaimed, “how can we talk to someone who is an infant in the cradle?”
˹it is˺ a scorching fire.
had the deniers followed the right way, we would have certainly granted them abundant rain to drink—
there are some ˹hypocrites˺ who impress you with their views regarding worldly affairs and openly call upon allah to witness what is in their hearts, yet they are your worst adversaries.
and be patient! certainly allah does not discount the reward of the good-doers.
and one of his signs is that he created for you spouses from among yourselves so that you may find comfort in them. and he has placed between you compassion and mercy. surely in this are signs for people who reflect.
he is the one who has sent his messenger with ˹right˺ guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others. and sufficient is allah as a witness.
we blessed him with all goodness in this world, and in the hereafter he will certainly be among the righteous.
˹he is the˺ knower of the seen and unseen—the almighty, all-wise.
alif-lãm-mĩm-ra. these are the verses of the book. what has been revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ from your lord is the truth, but most people do not believe.
competition for more ˹gains˺ diverts you ˹from allah˺,
tell the disbelievers that if they desist, their past will be forgiven. but if they persist, then they have an example in those destroyed before them.
˹always˺ remember the name of your lord, and devote yourself to him wholeheartedly.
they were followed by a curse in this ˹life˺ and ˹will receive another˺ on the day of judgment. what an evil gift to receive!
they say, “our hearts are veiled against what you are calling us to, there is deafness in our ears, and there is a barrier between us and you. so do ˹whatever you want˺ and so shall we!”
and seek allah’s forgiveness—indeed, allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
remember the name of their lord, and pray.
then we sent our messengers in succession: whenever a messenger came to his people, they denied him. so we destroyed them, one after the other, reducing them to ˹cautionary˺ tales. so away with the people who refuse to believe!
and those who fear the punishment of their lord—
at last, when the trumpet will be blown with one blast,
allah knows best who your enemies are! and allah is sufficient as a guardian, and he is sufficient as a helper.
my lord! forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my house in faith, and ˹all˺ believing men and women. and increase the wrongdoers only in destruction.”
this is one of the stories of the unseen, which we reveal to you ˹o prophet˺. neither you nor your people knew it before this. so be patient! surely the ultimate outcome belongs ˹only˺ to the righteous.
and ˹remember˺ when jesus, son of mary, said, “o children of israel! i am truly allah’s messenger to you, confirming the torah which came before me, and giving good news of a messenger after me whose name will be ahmad.” yet when the prophet came to them with clear proofs, they said, “this is pure magic.”
they worship besides allah others who can neither harm nor benefit them, and say, “these are our intercessors with allah.” ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “are you informing allah of something he does not know in the heavens or the earth? glorified and exalted is he above what they associate ˹with him˺!”
then he summoned ˹his people˺ and called out,
and ˹remember˺ when abraham said, “my lord! show me how you give life to the dead.” allah responded, “do you not believe?” abraham replied, “yes i do, but just so my heart can be reassured.” allah said, “then bring four birds, train them to come to you, ˹then cut them into pieces,˺ and scatter them on different hilltops. then call them back, they will fly to you in haste. and ˹so you will˺ know that allah is almighty, all-wise.”
he responded, “and what knowledge do i have of what they do?
˹hoping˺ that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds, and increase them out of his grace. and allah provides for whoever he wills without limit.
the disbelievers claim they will not be resurrected. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “yes, by my lord, you will surely be resurrected, then you will certainly be informed of what you have done. and that is easy for allah.”
˹some of˺ the jews claim, “the fire will not touch us except for a number of days.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “have you taken a pledge from allah—for allah never breaks his word—or are you ˹just˺ saying about allah what you do not know?”
there is no blame on you for subtly showing interest in ˹divorced or widowed˺ women or for hiding ˹the intention˺ in your hearts. allah knows that you are considering them ˹for marriage˺. but do not make a secret commitment with them—you can only show interest in them appropriately. do not commit to the bond of marriage until the waiting period expires. know that allah is aware of what is in your hearts, so beware of him. and know that allah is all-forgiving, most forbearing.
o prophet! why do you prohibit ˹yourself˺ from what allah has made lawful to you, seeking to please your wives? and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
allah—the sustainer ˹needed by all˺.
indeed, those who say, “allah is the messiah, son of mary,” have fallen into disbelief. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “who has the power to prevent allah if he chose to destroy the messiah, son of mary, his mother, and everyone in the world all together?” to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between. he creates whatever he wills. and allah is most capable of everything.
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the excellent reward of the hereafter. for allah loves the good-doers.
a lying, sinful forelock.
what an evil example of those who denied our signs! they ˹only˺ wronged their own souls.
and indeed, we tested solomon, placing a ˹deformed˺ body on his throne, then he turned ˹to allah in repentance˺.
if you ask them ˹o prophet˺ who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, “the almighty, all-knowing did.”
“my lord! you have surely granted me authority and taught me the interpretation of dreams. ˹o˺ originator of the heavens and the earth! you are my guardian in this world and the hereafter. allow me to die as one who submits and join me with the righteous.”
torn between belief and disbelief—belonging neither to these ˹believers˺ nor those ˹disbelievers˺. and whoever allah leaves to stray, you will never find for them a way.
˹finally,˺ the surviving ex-prisoner remembered ˹joseph˺ after a long time and said, “i will tell you its interpretation, so send me forth ˹to joseph˺.”
have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? they were far superior in might. but there is nothing that can escape allah in the heavens or the earth. he is certainly all-knowing, most capable.
a challenger has demanded a punishment bound to come
along with others of them who have not yet joined them ˹in faith˺. for he is the almighty, all-wise.
you will never achieve righteousness until you donate some of what you cherish. and whatever you give is certainly well known to allah.
it is certainly we who give life and cause death. and to us is the final return.
adding, “we are far superior ˹to the believers˺ in wealth and children, and we will never be punished.”
if the enemy is inclined towards peace, make peace with them. and put your trust in allah. indeed, he ˹alone˺ is the all-hearing, all-knowing.
all praise is for allah—lord of all worlds,
if we willed, we could simply reduce this ˹harvest˺ to chaff, leaving you to lament,
and they say, “˹these revelations are only˺ ancient fables which he has had written down, and they are rehearsed to him morning and evening.”
˹he ordered,˺ “bring them back to me!” then he began to rub down their legs and necks.
as for those given their records in their right hand, they will cry ˹happily˺, “here ˹everyone˺! read my record!
˹they will be˺ maidens with gorgeous eyes, reserved in pavilions.
there are also those ˹hypocrites˺ who set up a mosque ˹only˺ to cause harm, promote disbelief, divide the believers, and as a base for those who had previously fought against allah and his messenger. they will definitely swear, “we intended nothing but good,” but allah bears witness that they are surely liars.
and it is allah’s will to lighten your burdens, for humankind was created weak.
it is allah who has created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six days, then established himself on the throne. you have no protector or intercessor besides him. will you not then be mindful?
˹tell them, o prophet,˺ “worship none but allah. surely i am a warner and deliverer of good news to you from him.
and inform them ˹o prophet˺ about abraham’s guests
o believers! patiently endure, persevere, stand on guard, and be mindful of allah, so you may be successful.
whenever they bring you an argument, we come to you with the right refutation and the best explanation.
let them worship the lord of this ˹sacred˺ house,
we do not send the angels down except for a just cause, and then ˹the end of˺ the disbelievers will not be delayed.
˹remember˺ when he caused drowsiness to overcome you, giving you serenity. and he sent down rain from the sky to purify you, free you from satan’s whispers, strengthen your hearts, and make ˹your˺ steps firm.
thinking they would never return ˹to allah˺.
return to your father and say, ‘o our father! your son committed theft. we testify only to what we know. we could not guard against the unforeseen.
and do not follow the command of the transgressors,
how can you ˹o pagans˺ then dispute with him regarding what he saw?
when they are told, “do not spread corruption in the land,” they reply, “we are only peace-makers!”
is it false gods that you desire instead of allah?
and who would reject the faith of abraham except a fool! we certainly chose him in this life, and in the hereafter he will surely be among the righteous.
whenever we sent a prophet to a society, we afflicted its ˹disbelieving˺ people with suffering and adversity, so perhaps they would be humbled.
witnessed by those nearest ˹to allah˺.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything within. and he is most capable of everything.
˹allah is aware of˺ the prophet’s cry: “o my lord! indeed, these are a people who persist in disbelief.”
and so that allah will help you tremendously.
it is they who will have nothing in the hereafter except the fire. their efforts in this life will be fruitless and their deeds will be useless.
those who trade belief for disbelief will never harm allah in the least, and they will suffer a painful punishment.
certainly, this is the true narrative, and there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except allah. and indeed, allah ˹alone˺ is the almighty, all-wise.
the ˹misled˺ followers will cry, “if only we could have a second chance, we would disown them as they disowned us.” and so allah will make them remorseful of their misdeeds. and they will never ˹be able to˺ leave the fire.
as for those bound for misery, they will be in the fire, where they will be sighing and gasping,
oh pity, such beings! no messenger ever came to them without being mocked.
they are indeed the true disbelievers. and we have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment.
say, “sufficient is allah as a witness between me and you. he is certainly all-knowing, all-seeing of his servants.”
indeed, it is we who have revealed the quran to you ˹o prophet˺ in stages.
the foolish among the people will ask, “why did they turn away from the direction of prayer they used to face?” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “the east and west belong ˹only˺ to allah. he guides whoever he wills to the straight path.”
so go to him and say, ‘indeed we are both messengers from your lord, so let the children of israel go with us, and do not oppress them. we have come to you with a sign from your lord. and salvation will be for whoever follows the ˹right˺ guidance.
now, the pagans are astonished that a warner has come to them from among themselves. and the disbelievers say, “this is a magician, a total liar!
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “fleeing will not benefit you if you ˹try to˺ escape a natural or violent death. ˹if it is not your time,˺ you will only be allowed enjoyment for a little while.”
they ask ˹mockingly˺, “when is this ˹day of final˺ decision, if what you say is true?”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “this ˹quran˺ has been revealed by the one who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. surely he is all-forgiving, most merciful.”
then on the day of judgment he will humiliate them and say, “where are my ˹so-called˺ associate-gods for whose sake you used to oppose ˹the believers˺?” those gifted with knowledge will say, “surely disgrace and misery today are upon the disbelievers.”
˹beware of˺ the day the trumpet will be blown,
withholder of good, transgressor, and doubter,
allah responded ˹to moses and aaron˺, “your prayer is answered! so be steadfast and do not follow the way of those who do not know.”
good and evil cannot be equal. respond ˹to evil˺ with what is best, then the one you are in a feud with will be like a close friend.
for if you spare ˹any of˺ them, they will certainly mislead your servants, and give birth only to ˹wicked˺ sinners, staunch disbelievers.
and ˹allah has also turned in mercy to˺ the three who had remained behind, ˹whose guilt distressed them˺ until the earth, despite its vastness, seemed to close in on them, and their souls were torn in anguish. they knew there was no refuge from allah except in him. then he turned to them in mercy so that they might repent. surely allah ˹alone˺ is the accepter of repentance, most merciful.
and ˹splendid˺ carpets spread out.
are those who will only have their ˹bare˺ faces to shield themselves from the awful torment on judgment day ˹better than those in paradise˺? it will ˹then˺ be said to the wrongdoers: “reap what you sowed!”
˹they did not eat,˺ so he grew fearful of them.
when they come to you ˹believers˺ they say, “we believe.” but they are committed to disbelief when they enter and when they leave. and allah knows what they hide.
leaving the wives that your lord has created for you? in fact, you are a transgressing people.”
no soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. and if a sin-burdened soul cries for help with its burden, none of it will be carried—even by a close relative. you ˹o prophet˺ can only warn those who stand in awe of their lord without seeing him and establish prayer. whoever purifies themselves, they only do so for their own good. and to allah is the final return.
and those taking the lead vigorously,
˹he is˺ allah! there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him, the lord of the mighty throne.”
˹then˺ each soul will know what it has sent forth or left behind.
and he is the one who sends the winds ushering in his mercy, and we send down pure rain from the sky,
as for the jinn, we created them earlier from smokeless fire.
why should you not eat of what is slaughtered in allah’s name when he has already explained to you what he has forbidden to you—except when compelled by necessity? many ˹deviants˺ certainly mislead others by their whims out of ignorance. surely your lord knows the transgressors best.
the pagans set aside for allah a share of the crops and cattle he created, saying, “this ˹portion˺ is for allah,” so they claim, “and this ˹one˺ for our associate-gods.” yet the portion of their associate-gods is not shared with allah while allah’s portion is shared with their associate-gods. what unfair judgment!
yet they worship besides allah what can neither benefit nor harm them. and the disbeliever always collaborates against their lord.
that night the angels and the ˹holy˺ spirit descend, by the permission of their lord, for every ˹decreed˺ matter.
stirring up ˹clouds of˺ dust,
absolutely not! in fact, you are not ˹even˺ gracious to the orphan,
whoever emigrates in the cause of allah will find many safe havens and bountiful resources throughout the earth. those who leave their homes and die while emigrating to allah and his messenger—their reward has already been secured with allah. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
and joseph’s brothers came and entered his presence. he recognized them but they were unaware of who he really was.
it is only a reminder to the whole world.
when they had passed further, he said to his assistant, “bring us our meal! we have certainly been exhausted by today’s journey.”
their example is that of someone who kindles a fire, but when it lights up all around them, allah takes away their light, leaving them in complete darkness—unable to see.
then after these ˹messengers˺ we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs. but they behaved arrogantly and were a wicked people.
as for those who believe in allah and hold fast to him, he will admit them into his mercy and grace and guide them to himself through the straight path.
today i have indeed rewarded them for their perseverance: they are certainly the triumphant.”
recite what has been revealed to you of the book and establish prayer. indeed, ˹genuine˺ prayer should deter ˹one˺ from indecency and wickedness. the remembrance of allah is ˹an˺ even greater ˹deterrent˺. and allah ˹fully˺ knows what you ˹all˺ do.
so that they may eat from its fruit, which they had no hand in making. will they not then give thanks?
they are ˹all˺ enemies to me, except the lord of all worlds.
if you fear you might fail to give orphan women their ˹due˺ rights ˹if you were to marry them˺, then marry other women of your choice—two, three, or four. but if you are afraid you will fail to maintain justice, then ˹content yourselves with˺ one this way you are less likely to commit injustice.
on that day, allah will give them their just penalty in full, and they will ˹come to˺ know that allah ˹alone˺ is the ultimate truth.
observe the prayer from the decline of the sun until the darkness of the night and the dawn prayer, for certainly the dawn prayer is witnessed ˹by angels˺.
they threatened, “if you do not desist, o lot, you will surely be expelled.”
she advanced towards him, and he would have done likewise, had he not seen a sign from his lord. this is how we kept evil and indecency away from him, for he was truly one of our chosen servants.
similar situations came to pass before you, so travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers.
obeyed there ˹in heaven˺, and trustworthy.
if you disbelieve, then ˹know that˺ allah is truly not in need of you, nor does he approve of disbelief from his servants. but if you become grateful ˹through faith˺, he will appreciate that from you. no soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. then to your lord is your return, and he will inform you of what you used to do. he certainly knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
and his wife was standing by, so she laughed, then we gave her good news of ˹the birth of˺ isaac, and, after him, jacob.
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days, for allah is all-seeing of what you do.
if only the believing men and women had thought well of one another, when you heard this ˹rumour˺, and said, “this is clearly ˹an outrageous˺ slander!”
˹he is˺ the one who created me, and he ˹alone˺ guides me.
it has been made permissible for you to be intimate with your wives during the nights preceding the fast. your spouses are a garment ˹you may˺ eat and drink until you see the light of dawn breaking the darkness of night, then complete the fast until nightfall. do not be intimate with your spouses while you are meditating in the mosques. these are the limits set by allah, so do not exceed them. this is how allah makes his revelations clear to people, so they may become mindful ˹of him˺.
so by your lord! we will certainly question them all
we revealed to him this decree: “those ˹sinners˺ will be uprooted in the morning.”
surely the virtuous will be in bliss,
your wealth and children are only a test, but allah ˹alone˺ has a great reward.
i never told them anything except what you ordered me to say: “worship allah—my lord and your lord!” and i was witness over them as long as i remained among them. but when you took me, you were the witness over them—and you are a witness over all things.
is it you who cause it to grow, or is it we who do so?
consistently performing their prayers;
ordain for us what is good in this life and the next. indeed, we have turned to you ˹in repentance˺.” allah replied, “i will inflict my torment on whoever i will. but my mercy encompasses everything. i will ordain mercy for those who shun evil, pay alms-tax, and believe in our revelations.
they said, “no matter what sign you may bring to deceive us, we will never believe in you.”
so if they believe in what you believe, then they will indeed be ˹rightly˺ guided. but if they turn away, they are simply opposed ˹to the truth˺. but allah will spare you their evil. for he is the all-hearing, all-knowing.
is it not yet clear to them how many peoples we destroyed before them, whose ruins they still pass by? surely in this are signs for people of sound judgment.
did the people of those societies feel secure that our punishment would not come upon them by night while they were asleep?
˹jesus˺ declared, “i am truly a servant of allah. he has destined me to be given the scripture and to be a prophet.
it leads to right guidance so we believed in it, and we will never associate anyone with our lord ˹in worship˺.
even after we have been reduced to decayed bones?”
and he is ˹the one˺ who, i hope, will forgive my flaws on judgment day.”
and when the seas are set on fire,
they will turn on each other, throwing blame.
for the living and the dead,
surely this ˹quran˺ is a decisive word,
while the lote tree was overwhelmed with ˹heavenly˺ splendours!
respond to your lord before the coming of a day from allah that cannot be averted. there will be no refuge for you then, nor ˹grounds for˺ denial ˹of sins˺.
and wait! surely we ˹too˺ are waiting.”
so it was. and we truly had full knowledge of him.
i never called them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth or ˹even˺ their own creation, nor would i take the misleaders as helpers.
˹those˺ who believed in our signs and ˹fully˺ submitted ˹to us˺.
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “who is the best witness?” say, “allah is! he is a witness between me and you. and this quran has been revealed to me so that, with it, i may warn you and whoever it reaches. do you ˹pagans˺ testify that there are other gods besides allah?” ˹then˺ say, “i will never testify ˹to this˺!” ˹and˺ say, “there is only one god. and i totally reject whatever ˹idols˺ you associate with him.”
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies allah. for he is the almighty, all-wise.
or do the evildoers ˹simply˺ think that they will escape us? how wrong is their judgment!
for, indeed, if they find out about you, they will stone you ˹to death˺, or force you back into their faith, and then you will never succeed.”
and let me guide you to your lord so that you will be in awe ˹of him˺?’”
pharaoh declared, “o chiefs! i know of no other god for you but myself. so bake bricks out of clay for me, o haman, and build a high tower so i may look at the god of moses, although i am sure he is a liar.”
and the mountains will be like carded wool.
allah asked, “what prevented you from prostrating when i commanded you?” he replied, “i am better than he is: you created me from fire and him from clay.”
that is how we caused them to be discovered so that their people might know that allah’s promise ˹of resurrection˺ is true and that there is no doubt about the hour. some proposed, “build a structure around them. their lord knows best about them.” those who prevailed in the matter said, “we will surely build a place of worship over them.”
also, you are only a human being like us, and we think you are indeed a liar.
taking interest despite its prohibition, and consuming people’s wealth unjustly. we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment.
they concluded, “burn him up to avenge your gods, if you must act.”
the messengers responded, “our lord knows that we have truly been sent to you.
why is it that every time they make a covenant, a group of them casts it aside? in fact, most of them do not believe.
o mary! be devout to your lord, prostrate yourself ˹in prayer˺ and bow along with those who bow down.”
o believers! honour your obligations. all grazing livestock has been made lawful to you—except what is hereby announced to you and hunting while on pilgrimage. indeed, allah commands what he wills.
then pharaoh pursued them with his soldiers—but how overwhelming were the waters that submerged them!
do not mix truth with falsehood or hide the truth knowingly.
who deny and turn away.
for the day of ˹final˺ decision!
he replied, “o my people! i am not misguided! but i am a messenger from the lord of all worlds,
˹imagine˺ how many peoples we destroyed before them, and they cried out when it was too late to escape.
o believers! do not approach prayer while intoxicated and allah is ever-pardoning, all-forgiving.
to him belong the keys ˹of the treasuries˺ of the heavens and the earth. as for those who rejected the signs of allah, it is they who will be the ˹true˺ losers.
relate to them ˹o prophet˺ the story of abraham,
˹but˺ on that day the residents of paradise will have the best settlement and the finest place to rest.
striking sparks of fire ˹with their hoofs˺,
glorified and highly exalted is he above what they claim!
the day they will come forth from the graves swiftly, as if racing to an idol ˹for a blessing˺,
they set up equals to allah to mislead ˹others˺ from his way. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “enjoy yourselves! surely your destination is the fire.”
surely in the alternation of the day and the night, and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are truly signs for those mindful ˹of him˺.
and whoever allah leaves to stray will have no guide after him. you will see the wrongdoers, when they face the torment, pleading, “is there any way back ˹to the world˺?”
do not marry polytheistic women until they believe; for a believing slave-woman is better than a free polytheist, even though she may look pleasant to you. and do not marry your women to polytheistic men until they believe, for a believing slave-man is better than a free polytheist, even though he may look pleasant to you. they invite ˹you˺ to the fire while allah invites ˹you˺ to paradise and forgiveness by his grace. he makes his revelations clear to the people so perhaps they will be mindful.
it is allah who originates the creation, and will resurrect it. and then to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.
˹imagine, o prophet˺ how many peoples we have destroyed before them, who were far better in luxury and splendour!
indeed, this is how we reward the good-doers.
burn in it today for your disbelief.”
and your lord comes ˹to judge˺ with angels, rank upon rank,
but as soon as we removed the torment from them—until they met their inevitable fate—they broke their promise.
this is allah’s guidance with which he guides whoever he wills of his servants. had they associated others with him ˹in worship˺, their ˹good˺ deeds would have been wasted.
indeed, it is one of their ˹outrageous˺ fabrications to say,
or ˹ask them,˺ “who created the heavens and the earth, and sends down rain for you from the sky, by which we cause delightful gardens to grow? you could never cause their trees to grow. was it another god besides allah?” absolutely not! but they are a people who set up equals ˹to allah˺!
did he not frustrate their scheme?
but satan whispered to him, saying, “o adam! shall i show you the tree of immortality and a kingdom that does not fade away?”
and among the nomads are those who consider what they donate to be a loss and await your misfortune. may ill-fortune befall them! and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
ask, “imagine if allah’s punishment were to overwhelm you with or without warning—who would be destroyed other than the wrongdoers?”
but they cannot do so unless allah wills. he ˹alone˺ is worthy to be feared and entitled to forgive.
now, ˹simply˺ because he has been blessed with ˹abundant˺ wealth and children,
he created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. he shaped you ˹in the womb˺, perfecting your form. and to him is the final return.
they will be desperate to get out of the fire but they will never be able to. and they will suffer an everlasting punishment.
what about those against whom the decree of torment has been justified? is it you ˹o prophet˺ who will then save those bound for the fire?
the sky will be ˹split˺ open, becoming ˹many˺ gates,
˹utterly˺ grateful for allah’s favours. ˹so˺ he chose him and guided him to the straight path.
˹watch for˺ the day he will gather them along with what they used to worship besides allah, and ask ˹the objects of worship˺, “was it you who misled these servants of mine, or did they stray from the way ˹on their own˺?”
and we send down blessed rain from the sky, bringing forth gardens and grains for harvest,
and ˹even˺ their spouse and children.
this is because allah is the patron of the believers while the disbelievers have no patron.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. and to allah is the final return.
and as for those whose scale is light,
we certainly destroyed the societies around you after having varied the signs so perhaps they would return ˹to the right path˺.
about the momentous news,
and what will make you realize what the nightly star is?
˹you would have suffered,˺ had it not been for allah’s grace and mercy upon you, and had allah not been ever gracious, most merciful.
and the witness and what is witnessed!
when we replace a verse with another—and allah knows best what he reveals—they say, “you ˹muhammad˺ are just a fabricator.” in fact, most of them do not know.
if you ˹pagans˺ persist in disbelief, then how will you guard yourselves against ˹the horrors of˺ a day which will turn children’s hair grey?
allah will not hold you accountable for unintentional oaths, but for what you intended in your hearts. and allah is all-forgiving, most forbearing.
today we will preserve your corpse so that you may become an example for those who come after you. and surely most people are heedless of our examples!”
indeed, in the story of joseph and his brothers there are lessons for all who ask.
there are some among the people of moses who guide with the truth and establish justice accordingly.
so he travelled a course,
o believers! when you rise up for prayer, wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, wipe your heads, and wash your feet to the ankles. and if you are in a state of ˹full˺ impurity, it is not allah’s will to burden you, but to purify you and complete his favour upon you, so perhaps you will be grateful.
and whoever we grant a long life, we reverse them in development. will they not then understand?
for them is good news in this worldly life and the hereafter. there is no change in the promise of allah. that is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.
satan responded, “my lord! for allowing me to stray i will surely tempt them on earth and mislead them all together,
indeed, allah ˹alone˺ keeps the heavens and the earth from falling apart. if they were to fall apart, none but him could hold them up. he is truly most forbearing, all-forgiving.
when the believers in our revelations come to you, say, “peace be upon you! your lord has taken upon himself to be merciful. whoever among you commits evil ignorantly ˹or recklessly˺ then repents afterwards and mends their ways, then allah is truly all-forgiving, most merciful.”
nor can you lead the blind out of their misguidance. you can make none hear ˹the truth˺ except those who believe in our revelations, ˹fully˺ submitting ˹to allah˺.
˹the angels announced,˺ “o zachariah! indeed, we give you the good news of ˹the birth of˺ a son, whose name will be john—a name we have not given to anyone before.”
˹for˺ we will soon send upon you a weighty revelation.
each ˹warner˺ asked, “even if what i brought you is better guidance than what you found your forefathers practicing?” they replied, “we totally reject whatever you have been sent with.”
and remember our servants: abraham, isaac, and jacob—the men of strength and insight.
indeed, we have sent down the book to you ˹o prophet˺ in truth to judge between people by means of what allah has shown you. so do not be an advocate for the deceitful.
the disbelievers from the people of the book and the polytheists were not going to desist ˹from disbelief˺ until the clear proof came to them:
then satan tempted them in order to expose what was hidden of their nakedness. he said, “your lord has forbidden this tree to you only to prevent you from becoming angels or immortals.”
˹still they turn away˺ when it is said to them, “beware of what is ahead of you ˹in the hereafter˺ and what is behind you ˹of destroyed nations˺ so you may be shown mercy.”
they will cry, “my lord! why have you raised me up blind, although i used to see?”
in which they will remain forever;
noah called out to his lord, saying, “my lord! certainly my son is ˹also˺ of my family, your promise is surely true, and you are the most just of all judges!”
but no! there will certainly be a raging flame
so we instructed, “strike the dead body with a piece of the cow.” this is how ˹easily˺ allah brings the dead to life, showing you his signs so that you may understand.
and the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook the wrongdoers, so they fell lifeless in their homes,
our lord! remove ˹this˺ torment from us, ˹and˺ we will certainly believe.”
would any of you wish to have a garden with palm trees, grapevines, and all kinds of fruits with rivers flowing underneath and as they grow very old with dependent children, a fiery whirlwind hits the garden, burning it all up? this is how allah makes his revelations clear to you, so perhaps you will reflect.
this ˹quran˺ is a ˹sufficient˺ message for humanity so that they may take it as a warning and know that there is only one god, and so that people of reason may be mindful.
and ˹that of˺ abraham, who ˹perfectly˺ fulfilled ˹his covenant˺?
this is the ˹natural˺ way of allah. and who is better than allah in ordaining a way? and we worship ˹none but˺ him.
perhaps, if he were to divorce you ˹all˺, his lord would replace you with better wives who are submissive ˹to allah˺, faithful ˹to him˺, devout, repentant, dedicated to worship and fasting—previously married or virgins.
moses replied, “i did it then, lacking guidance.
he has guided some, while others are destined to stray. they have taken devils as their masters instead of allah—thinking they are ˹rightly˺ guided.
so he may admit believing men and women into gardens under which rivers flow—to stay there forever—and absolve them of their sins. and that is a supreme achievement in the sight of allah.
surely your lord is ever bountiful to humanity, but most of them are ungrateful.
now if you ˹hypocrites˺ turn away, perhaps you would then spread corruption throughout the land and sever your ˹ties of˺ kinship!
o prophet! say to your wives, “if you desire the life of this world and its luxury, then come, i will give you a ˹suitable˺ compensation ˹for divorce˺ and let you go graciously.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “should i seek a lord other than allah while he is the lord of everything?” no one will reap except what they sow. no soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. then to your lord is your return, and he will inform you of your differences.
for those who are jewish, we forbade every animal with undivided hoofs and the fat of oxen and sheep except what is joined to their backs or intestines or mixed with bone. in this way we rewarded them for their violations. and we are certainly truthful.
lot pleaded, “indeed, these are my guests, so do not embarrass me.
and among his signs is that you see the earth devoid of life, but as soon as we send down rain upon it, it begins to stir ˹to life˺ and swell. indeed, the one who revives it can easily revive the dead. he is certainly most capable of everything.
noah had prayed, “my lord! do not leave a single disbeliever on earth.
and among us are those who have submitted ˹to allah˺ and those who are deviant. so ˹as for˺ those who submitted, it is they who have attained right guidance.
and let those who do not have the means to marry keep themselves chaste until allah enriches them out of his bounty. and if any of those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession desires a deed of emancipation, make it possible for them, if you find goodness in them. and give them some of allah’s wealth which he has granted you. do not force your ˹slave˺ girls into prostitution for your own worldly gains while they wish to remain chaste. and if someone coerces them, then after such a coercion allah is certainly all-forgiving, most merciful ˹to them˺.
surely allah is my lord and your lord. so worship him ˹alone˺. this is the straight path.’”
the king ˹then˺ said, “bring him to me.” when the messenger came to him, joseph said, “go back to your master and ask him about the case of the women who cut their hands. surely my lord has ˹full˺ knowledge of their cunning.”
˹beware of˺ the day the earth will split open, letting them rush forth. that will be an easy gathering for us.
whoever invokes, besides allah, another god—for which they can have no proof—they will surely find their penalty with their lord. indeed, the disbelievers will never succeed.
those who are stingy and promote stinginess among people. and whoever turns away ˹should know that˺ allah ˹alone˺ is truly the self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
is it astonishing to people that we have sent revelation to a man from among themselves, ˹instructing him,˺ “warn humanity and give good news to the believers that they will have an honourable status with their lord.”? yet the disbelievers said, “indeed, this ˹man˺ is clearly a magician!”
neither your relatives nor children will benefit you on judgment day—he will decide between you ˹all˺. for allah is all-seeing of what you do.
are these ˹humble believers˺ the ones you swore would never be shown allah’s mercy?” ˹finally, those on the heights will be told:˺ “enter paradise! there will be no fear for you, nor will you grieve.”
o believers! allah will surely test you with game within the reach of your hands and spears to distinguish those who fear him in secret. whoever transgresses from now on will suffer a painful punishment.
and had they observed the torah, the gospel, and what has been revealed to them from their lord, they would have been overwhelmed with provisions from above and below. some among them are upright, yet many do nothing but evil.
he will certainly admit them into a place they will be pleased with. for allah is truly all-knowing, most forbearing.
then causes them to die and be buried.
he ˹then˺ added, “what is your mission, o messenger-angels?”
it destroyed everything by the command of its lord, leaving nothing visible except their ruins. this is how we reward the wicked people.
qãf. by the glorious quran!
and ˹for˺ protection from every rebellious devil.
do not treat the messenger’s summons to you ˹as lightly˺ as your summons to one another. so let those who disobey his orders beware, for an affliction may befall them, or a painful torment may overtake them.
but if you turn away, i have already delivered to you what i have been sent with. my lord will replace you with others. you are not harming him in the least. indeed, my lord is a ˹vigilant˺ keeper over all things.”
whatever ˹idols˺ you worship instead of him are mere names which you and your forefathers have made up—a practice allah has never authorized. it is only allah who decides. he has commanded that you worship none but him. that is the upright faith, but most people do not know.
so we forgave that for him. and he will indeed have ˹a status of˺ closeness to us and an honourable destination!
or to give food in times of famine
we did not find most of them true to their covenant. rather, we found most of them truly rebellious.
remember me; i will remember you. and thank me, and never be ungrateful.
and whoever commits a sin—it is only to their own loss. allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
so let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it. and those who do not judge by what allah has revealed are ˹truly˺ the rebellious.
when the truth came to them from us, they said, “this is certainly pure magic!”
allah made a covenant with the children of israel and appointed twelve leaders from among them and ˹then˺ said, “i am truly with you. if you establish prayer, pay alms-tax, believe in my messengers, support them, and lend to allah a good loan, i will certainly forgive your sins and admit you into gardens under which rivers flow. and whoever among you disbelieves afterwards has truly strayed from the right way.”
we drew the pursuers to that place,
have we not made the earth a lodging
or ˹is it because˺ the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between belongs to them? let them then climb their way ˹to heaven, if their claim is true˺.
and what will make you realize what hell is?
in fact, they are in doubt, amusing themselves.
and created jinn from a ˹smokeless˺ flame of fire.
allah sets forth the parable of a slave owned by several quarrelsome masters, and a slave owned by only one master. are they equal in condition? praise be to allah! in fact, most of them do not know.
for which day has all this been set?
he has revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ the book in truth, confirming what came before it, as he revealed the torah and the gospel
then we made you their successors in the land to see how you would act.
but it was our will to favour those who were oppressed in the land, making them models ˹of faith˺ as well as successors;
and ˹so˺ pharaoh led his people astray, and did not guide ˹them rightly˺.
today every soul will be rewarded for what it has done. no injustice today! surely allah is swift in reckoning.”
these are the verses of the book, rich in wisdom.
do you think you will be ˹forever˺ left secure in what you have here:
for such ˹honour˺ all should strive.
so leave them until they face their day in which they will be struck dead—
those who deny judgment day!
as for thamûd, we showed them guidance, but they preferred blindness over guidance. so the blast of a disgracing punishment overtook them for what they used to commit.
there is no blame on you for seeking the bounty of your lord ˹during this journey˺. and praise him for having guided you, for surely before this ˹guidance˺ you were astray.
and we protected it from every accursed devil,
the romans have been defeated
and made your sleep for rest,
when their brother noah said to them, “will you not fear ˹allah˺?
if allah were to punish people ˹immediately˺ for what they have committed, he would not have left a single living being on earth. but he delays them for an appointed term. and when their time arrives, then surely allah is all-seeing of his servants.
as if they were spooked zebras
˹my duty is˺ only to convey ˹the truth˺ from allah and ˹deliver˺ his messages.” and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger will certainly be in the fire of hell, to stay there for ever and ever.
i will surely subject him to a severe punishment, or ˹even˺ slaughter him, unless he brings me a compelling excuse.”
allah reassured ˹them˺, “have no fear! i am with you, hearing and seeing.
although we had certainly sent warners among them.
if they are found guilty ˹of false testimony˺, let the deceased’s two closest heirs affected by the bequest replace the witnesses and testify under oath ˹saying˺, “by allah! our testimony is truer than theirs. we have not transgressed. otherwise, we would surely be wrongdoers.”
and those gliding ˹through heavens˺ swiftly,
and those scattering ˹rainclouds˺ widely!
you already know how you were first created. will you not then be mindful?
˹the doomed will be told˺, “your gods have clearly denied your claims. so now you can neither ward off ˹the punishment˺ nor get any help.” and whoever of you does wrong, we will make them taste a horrible punishment.
˹always˺ remember the name of your lord morning and evening,
tell my ˹believing˺ servants to say only what is best. satan certainly seeks to sow discord among them. satan is indeed a sworn enemy to humankind.
˹beware of˺ the day we will ask hell, “are you full ˹yet˺?” and it will respond, “are there any more?”
but no! whoever submits themselves to allah and does good will have their reward with their lord. and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
and allah has said, “do not take two gods. there is only one god. so be in awe of me ˹alone˺.”
and indeed, this ˹quran˺ is the absolute truth.
the stars and the trees bow down ˹in submission˺.
where they will remain for ˹endless˺ ages.
o wives of the prophet! you are not like any other women: if you are mindful ˹of allah˺, then do not be overly effeminate in speech ˹with men˺ or those with sickness in their hearts may be tempted, but speak in a moderate tone.
also, they have a charge against me, so i fear they may kill me.”
o believers! do not ally yourselves with a people allah is displeased with. they already have no hope for the hereafter, just like the disbelievers lying in ˹their˺ graves.
and who ordained precisely and inspired accordingly,
when we give people a taste of mercy after being afflicted with a hardship, they swiftly devise plots against our revelations! say, ˹o prophet,˺ “allah is swifter in devising ˹punishment˺. surely our messenger-angels record whatever you devise.”
and the day when it shines!
or do they possess the treasuries of your lord, or are they in control ˹of everything˺?
the forgiver of sin and accepter of repentance, the severe in punishment, and infinite in bounty. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. to him ˹alone˺ is the final return.
and ˹remember˺ when we took a covenant from the prophets, as well as from you ˹o prophet˺, and from noah, abraham, moses, and jesus, son of mary. we did take a solemn covenant from ˹all of˺ them
once the prayer is over, disperse throughout the land and seek the bounty of allah. and remember allah often so you may be successful.
you see many of them taking the disbelievers as allies. truly wicked are their misdeeds, which have earned them allah’s wrath. and they will be in everlasting torment.
but the only response of abraham’s people was to say: “kill him or burn him!” but allah saved him from the fire. surely in this are signs for people who believe.
yes ˹indeed˺! we are ˹most˺ capable of restoring ˹even˺ their very fingertips.
˹allah added,˺ “and what is that in your right hand, o moses?”
this is because they say, “the fire will not touch us except for a few days.” they have been deceived in their faith by their wishful lying.
and worship your lord until the inevitable comes your way.
they said, “if a wolf were to devour him, despite our strong group, then we would certainly be losers!”
say, “what has been revealed to me is this: ‘your god is only one god.’ will you then submit?”
then we will turn to whatever ˹good˺ deeds they did, reducing them to scattered dust.
who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against allah? they will be brought before their lord, and the witnesses will say, “these are the ones who lied against their lord.” surely allah’s condemnation is upon the wrongdoers,
which cannot help them, or even help themselves?
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “can any of your associate-gods originate creation and then resurrect it?” say, “˹only˺ allah originates creation and then resurrects it. how can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺?”
then adam was inspired with words ˹of prayer˺ by his lord, so he accepted his repentance. surely he is the accepter of repentance, most merciful.
do you not see how they rant in every field,
turning away ˹in pride˺ to lead ˹others˺ astray from allah’s way. they will suffer disgrace in this world, and on the day of judgment we will make them taste the torment of burning.
˹the wicked will be told,˺ “taste this. you mighty, noble one!
yet the people have divided it into different sects, each rejoicing in what they have.
this is how we established joseph in the land to settle wherever he pleased. we shower our mercy on whoever we will, and we never discount the reward of the good-doers.
similarly, whenever we sent a warner to a society before you ˹o prophet˺, its ˹spoiled˺ elite would say, “we found our forefathers following a ˹particular˺ way, and we are walking in their footsteps.”
we used to indulge ˹in falsehood˺ along with others,
they ask you ˹for a ruling, o prophet˺. say, “allah gives you a ruling regarding those who die without children or parents.” if a man dies childless and leaves behind a sister, she will inherit one-half of his estate, whereas her brother will inherit all of her estate if she dies childless. if this person leaves behind two sisters, they together will inherit two-thirds of the estate. but if the deceased leaves male and female siblings, a male’s share will be equal to that of two females. allah makes ˹this˺ clear to you so you do not go astray. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
when they listen to what has been revealed to the messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears for recognizing the truth. they say, “our lord! we believe, so count us among the witnesses.
but we will reduce them to the lowest of the low ˹in hell˺,
o believers! do not betray allah and the messenger, nor betray your trusts knowingly.
if only you could see when the angels take the souls of the disbelievers, beating their faces and backs, ˹saying,˺ “taste the torment of burning!
so when they enraged us, we inflicted punishment upon them, drowning them all.
this is how we returned him to his mother so that her heart would be put at ease, and not grieve, and that she would know that allah’s promise is ˹always˺ true. but most people do not know.
those who do good will have the finest reward neither gloom nor disgrace will cover their faces. it is they who will be the residents of paradise. they will be there forever.
you lust after men instead of women! you are certainly transgressors.”
golden trays and cups will be passed around to them. there will be whatever the souls desire and the eyes delight in. and you will be there forever.
who ˹now˺ accept parts of the quran, rejecting others.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “had there been angels walking the earth, well settled, we would have surely sent down for them an angel from heaven as a messenger.”
and ˹we favoured˺ some of their forefathers, their descendants, and their brothers. we chose them and guided them to the straight path.
we do not send the messengers except as deliverers of good news and warners. but the disbelievers argue in falsehood, ˹hoping˺ to discredit the truth with it, and make a mockery of my revelations and warnings.
that he was only two arms-lengths away or even less.
or do they have associate-gods who have ordained for them some ˹polytheistic˺ beliefs, which allah has not authorized? had it not been for ˹prior˺ decree on judgment, the matter would have certainly been settled between them ˹at once˺. and surely the wrongdoers will suffer a painful punishment.
he replied ˹sarcastically˺, “no, this one—the biggest of them—did it! so ask them, if they can talk!”
they complained, “we have always been oppressed—before and after you came to us ˹with the message˺.” he replied, “perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land to see what you will do.”
so moses returned to his people, furious and sorrowful. he said, “o my people! had your lord not made you a good promise?
say to nomadic arabs, who stayed behind, “you will be called ˹to fight˺ against a people of great might, who you will fight unless they submit. if you then obey, allah will grant you a fine reward. but if you turn away as you did before, he will inflict upon you a painful punishment.”
we certainly know that your heart is truly distressed by what they say.
and they certainly attest to this—
surely allah does not shy away from using the parable of a mosquito or what is even smaller. as for the believers, they know that it is the truth from their lord. and as for the disbelievers, they argue, “what does allah mean by such a parable?” through this ˹test˺, he leaves many to stray, and guides many. and he leaves none to stray except the rebellious—
and say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹this is˺ the truth from your lord. whoever wills let them believe, and whoever wills let them disbelieve.” surely we have prepared for the wrongdoers a fire whose walls will ˹completely˺ surround them. when they cry for aid, they will be aided with water like molten metal, which will burn ˹their˺ faces. what a horrible drink! and what a terrible place to rest!
on the day they will be dragged into the fire on their faces, ˹they will be told,˺ “taste the touch of hell!”
the good they do in this worldly life is like the harvest of an evil people struck by a bitter wind, destroying it ˹completely˺. allah never wronged them, but they wronged themselves.
he is the one who shows you his signs and sends down ˹rain as˺ a provision for you from the sky. ˹but˺ none will be mindful except those who turn ˹to him˺.
bringing forth its water and pastures
so we seized each ˹people˺ for their sin: against some of them we sent a storm of stones, some were overtaken by a ˹mighty˺ blast, some we caused the earth to swallow, and some we drowned. allah would not have wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves.
all praise is for allah who created the heavens and the earth and made darkness and light. yet the disbelievers set up equals to their lord ˹in worship˺.
the messenger ˹firmly˺ believes in what has been revealed to him from his lord, and so do the believers. they ˹all˺ believe in allah, his angels, his books, and his messengers. ˹they proclaim,˺ “we make no distinction between any of his messengers.” and they say, “we hear and obey. ˹we seek˺ your forgiveness, our lord! and to you ˹alone˺ is the final return.”
and ˹remember˺ when we took a covenant from the children of israel ˹stating˺, “worship none but allah; be kind to parents, relatives, orphans and the needy; speak kindly to people; establish prayer; and pay alms-tax.” but you ˹israelites˺ turned away—except for a few of you—and were indifferent.
whoever desires the reward of this world, then ˹let them know that˺ with allah are the rewards of this world and the hereafter. and allah is all-hearing, all-seeing.
marked by your lord ˹o prophet˺. and these stones are not far from the ˹pagan˺ wrongdoers!
indeed, those men and women who give in charity and lend to allah a good loan will have it multiplied for them, and they will have an honourable reward.
their only argument will be: “by allah, our lord! we were never polytheists.”
˹they say,˺ “our lord! do not let our hearts deviate after you have guided us. grant us your mercy. you are indeed the giver ˹of all bounties˺.
the hypocrites, both men and women, are all alike: they encourage what is evil, forbid what is good, and withhold ˹what is in˺ their hands. they neglected allah, so he neglected them. surely the hypocrites are the rebellious.
then they were succeeded by other generations who inherited the scripture. they indulged in unlawful gains, claiming, “we will be forgiven ˹after all˺.” and if similar gain came their way, they would seize it. was a covenant not taken from them in the scripture that they would not say anything about allah except the truth? and they were already well-versed in its teachings. but the ˹eternal˺ home of the hereafter is far better for those mindful ˹of allah˺. will you not then understand?
this is because they follow whatever displeases allah and hate whatever pleases him, so he has rendered their deeds void.
then he approached ˹the prophet˺, coming so close
they said, “call upon your lord to specify for us its colour.” he replied, “allah says, ‘it should be a bright yellow cow—pleasant to see.’”
they replied, “we have actually been sent to a wicked people.
within three to nine years. the ˹whole˺ matter rests with allah before and after ˹victory˺. and on that day the believers will rejoice
allah responded, “be gone! whoever of them follows you, hell will surely be the reward for all of you—an ample reward.
and to establish them in the land; and through them show pharaoh, haman,
surely those who dispute allah’s signs—with no proof given to them—have nothing in their hearts but greed for dominance, which they will never attain. so seek refuge in allah. indeed, he alone is the all-hearing, all-seeing.
and cups set at hand,
so do not ever call upon any other god besides allah, or you will be one of the punished.
except those who repent, mend their ways, hold fast to allah, and are sincere in their devotion to allah; they will be with the believers. and allah will grant the believers a great reward.
you will see, and they too will see!
he turned away from them, saying, “o my people! indeed, i have delivered to you the messages of my lord and gave you ˹sincere˺ advice. how can i then grieve for those who chose to disbelieve?”
the path of those you have blessed—not those you are displeased with, or those who are astray.
has he fabricated a lie against allah or is he insane?” in fact, those who do not believe in the hereafter are bound for torment and have strayed farthest ˹from the truth˺.
lot responded, “i am truly one of those who despise your ˹shameful˺ practice.
a guide and a reminder to people of reason.
when the earth will be violently shaken,
they replied, “by allah! you are definitely still in your old delusion.”
we know best what they will say—the most reasonable of them will say, “you stayed no more than a day.”
successful indeed are those who purify themselves,
and he created the pairs—males and females—
indeed, this ˹quran˺ is the word of ˹allah delivered by gabriel,˺ a noble messenger-angel,
˹it is˺ the day people will be like scattered moths,
you are the best community ever raised for humanity—you encourage good, forbid evil, and believe in allah. had the people of the book believed, it would have been better for them. some of them are faithful, but most are rebellious.
and whoever does so on such an occasion—unless it is a manoeuvre or to join their own troops—will earn the displeasure of allah, and their home will be hell. what an evil destination!
the disbelieving chiefs of his people said, “we see you only as a human being like ourselves, and we see that no one follows you except the lowliest among us, who do so ˹hastily˺ without thinking. we do not see anything that makes ˹all of˺ you any better than us. in fact, we think you are liars.”
so that you do not defraud the scales.
how ˹can they have a treaty˺? if they were to have the upper hand over you, they would have no respect for kinship or treaty. they only flatter you with their tongues, but their hearts are in denial, and most of them are rebellious.
you will certainly have no authority over my servants, except the deviant who follow you,
with eyes downcast, totally covered with disgrace. for they were ˹always˺ called to prostrate ˹in the world˺ when they were fully capable ˹but they chose not to˺.
they raced for the door and she tore his shirt from the back, only to find her husband at the door. she cried, “what is the penalty for someone who tried to violate your wife, except imprisonment or a painful punishment?”
o prophet! ask your wives, daughters, and believing women to draw their cloaks over their bodies. in this way it is more likely that they will be recognized ˹as virtuous˺ and not be harassed. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
but whoever turns away, persisting in disbelief,
joseph’s men asked, “what should be the price for theft, if you are lying?”
˹to distance themselves,˺ joseph’s brothers argued, “if he has stolen, so did his ˹full˺ brother before.” and allah knows best ˹the truth of˺ what you claim.”
and ˹remember˺ when we parted the sea, rescued you, and drowned pharaoh’s people before your very eyes.
again they said, “call upon your lord so that he may make clear to us which cow, for all cows look the same to us. then, allah willing, we will be guided ˹to the right one˺.”
˹remember˺ when they came at you from east and west,
and we made him prevail over those who had rejected our signs. they were truly an evil people, so we drowned them all.
these ˹idols˺ are mere names that you and your forefathers have made up—a practice allah has never authorized. they follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions and whatever ˹their˺ souls desire, although ˹true˺ guidance has already come to them from their lord.
so the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds overtook them. and the wrongdoers among these ˹pagans˺ will be overtaken by the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds. and they will have no escape.
so once you have fulfilled ˹your duty˺, strive ˹in devotion˺,
and we have left a sign there ˹as a lesson˺ for those who fear the painful punishment.
and so we have made you ˹believers˺ an upright community so that you may be witnesses over humanity and that the messenger may be a witness over you. we assigned your former direction of prayer only to distinguish those who would remain faithful to the messenger from those who would lose faith. it was certainly a difficult test except for those ˹rightly˺ guided by allah. and allah would never discount your ˹previous acts of˺ faith. surely allah is ever gracious and most merciful to humanity.
moses pledged, “my lord! for all your favours upon me, i will never side with the wicked.”
it has indeed been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies ˹the truth˺ and turns away.’”
their prayer at the sacred house was nothing but whistling and clapping. so taste the punishment for your disbelief.
˹we also guided˺ ishmael, elisha, jonah, and lot, favouring each over other people ˹of their time˺.
they declared, “we ˹now˺ believe in the lord of all worlds—
muhammad is no more than a messenger; other messengers have gone before him. if he were to die or to be killed, would you regress into disbelief? those who do so will not harm allah whatsoever. and allah will reward those who are grateful.
surely you are ˹lost˺ in conflicting views ˹regarding the truth˺.
they asked, turning back, “what have you lost?”
you passed by the ruins of those ˹destroyed peoples˺ who had wronged themselves. it was made clear to you how we dealt with them, and we gave you ˹many˺ examples.
or ˹because˺ they failed to recognize their messenger, and so they denied him?
allah ˹even˺ knows the sly glances of the eyes and whatever the hearts conceal.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “my lord! should you show me what they are threatened with,
and we will make the later disbelievers follow them.
if we willed, we could send down upon them a ˹compelling˺ sign from the heavens, leaving their necks bent in ˹utter˺ submission to it.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “believe in this ˹quran˺, or do not. indeed, when it is recited to those who were gifted with knowledge before it ˹was revealed˺, they fall upon their faces in prostration,
she said, “o chiefs! advise me in this matter of mine, for i would never make any decision without you.”
or has he not been informed of what is in the scripture of moses,
will certainly eat from ˹the fruit of˺ the trees of zaqqûm,
i do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. my reward is only from the lord of all worlds.
and i have selected you for my service.
they argued, “have you come to turn us away from our gods? bring us then whatever you threaten us with, if what you say is true.”
likewise for those who spend their wealth to show off and do not believe in allah or the last day. and whoever takes satan as an associate—what an evil associate they have!
they say, “why has no ˹visible˺ angel come with him?” had we sent down an angel, the matter would have certainly been settled ˹at once˺, and they would have never been given more time ˹to repent˺.
divorce may be retracted twice, then the husband must retain ˹his wife˺ with honour or separate ˹from her˺ with grace. these are the limits set by allah, so do not transgress them. and whoever transgresses the limits of allah, they are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers.
and ˹he subjected˺ for you whatever he has created on earth of varying colours. surely in this is a sign for those who are mindful.
rushing forth, heads raised, never blinking, hearts void.
we appointed for moses thirty nights then added another ten—completing his lord’s term of forty nights. moses commanded his brother aaron, “take my place among my people, do what is right, and do not follow the way of the corruptors.”
when the son of mary was cited as an example ˹in argument˺, your people ˹o prophet˺ broke into ˹joyful˺ applause.
and when the seas burst forth,
there will be no intercessors for them from among their associate-gods, and they will ˹totally˺ deny their associate-gods.
enter it in peace. this is the day of eternal life!”
when you divorce women and they have ˹almost˺ reached the end of their waiting period, either retain them honourably or let them go honourably. but do not retain them ˹only˺ to harm them ˹or˺ to take advantage ˹of them˺. whoever does that surely wrongs his own soul. do not take allah’s revelations lightly. remember allah’s favours upon you as well as the book and wisdom he has sent down for your guidance. be mindful of allah, and know that allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
now you see the mountains, thinking they are firmly fixed, but they are travelling ˹just˺ like clouds. ˹that is˺ the design of allah, who has perfected everything. surely he is all-aware of what you do.
and ˹when˺ it is said to those mindful ˹of allah˺, “what has your lord revealed?” they say, “all the best!” for those who do good in this world, there is goodness. but far better is the ˹eternal˺ home of the hereafter. how excellent indeed is the home of the righteous:
as for the disbelievers, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert, which the thirsty perceive as water, but when they approach it, they find it to be nothing. instead, they find allah there ˹in the hereafter, ready˺ to settle their account. and allah is swift in reckoning.
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “to whom belong the earth and all those on it, if you ˹really˺ know?”
and indeed, we created above you seven levels ˹of heaven˺. we are never unmindful of ˹our˺ creation.
the places of worship are ˹only˺ for allah, so do not invoke anyone besides him.
he created the heavens without pillars—as you can see—and placed firm mountains upon the earth so it does not shake with you, and scattered throughout it all types of creatures. and we send down rain from the sky, causing every type of fine plant to grow on earth.
indeed, i would then be clearly astray.
but you ˹deniers only˺ prefer the life of this world,
you see those with sickness in their hearts racing for their guardianship, saying ˹in justification˺, “we fear a turn of fortune will strike us.” but perhaps allah will bring about ˹your˺ victory or another favour by his command, and they will regret what they have hidden in their hearts.
i have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed:
˹as for˺ those ˹faithful˺ to whom we had given the scripture before this ˹quran˺, they do believe in it.
those mindful ˹of allah˺ will not be accountable for those ˹who ridicule it˺ whatsoever—their duty is to advise, so perhaps the ridiculers will abstain.
it is not for any soul to believe except by allah’s leave, and he will bring his wrath upon those who are unmindful.
˹the misleaders will say to one another,˺ “here is a crowd ˹of followers˺ being thrown in with us. they are not welcome, ˹for˺ they ˹too˺ will burn in the fire.”
that was a community that had already gone before. for them is what they earned and for you is what you have earned. and you will not be accountable for what they have done.
but i will certainly send him a gift, and see what ˹response˺ my envoys will return with.”
my authority has been stripped from me.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i have been forbidden to worship those ˹idols˺ you worship besides allah, since clear proofs have come to me from my lord. and i have been commanded to ˹fully˺ submit to the lord of all worlds.”
our lord! admit them into the gardens of eternity which you have promised them, along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and descendants. you ˹alone˺ are truly the almighty, all-wise.
indeed, we have sent revelation to you ˹o prophet˺ as we sent revelation to noah and the prophets after him. we also sent revelation to abraham, ishmael, isaac, jacob, and his descendants, ˹as well as˺ jesus, job, jonah, aaron, and solomon. and to david we gave the psalms.
indeed, we have created everything, perfectly preordained.
do not kill your children for fear of poverty. we provide for them and for you. surely killing them is a heinous sin.
read, ˹o prophet,˺ in the name of your lord who created—
it is they who will be rewarded with ˹elevated˺ mansions ˹in paradise˺ for their perseverance, and will be received with salutations and ˹greetings of˺ peace,
indeed, we have sent down to you ˹o prophet˺ clear revelations. ˹but˺ none will deny them except the rebellious.
as a home for the transgressors,
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “imagine if allah were to make the night perpetual for you until the day of judgment, which god other than allah could bring you sunlight? will you not then listen?”
you will recognize on their faces the glow of delight.
and setting the mountains firmly ˹upon it˺—
except by mercy from us, allowing them enjoyment for a ˹little˺ while.
if he wills, he can calm the wind, leaving the ships motionless on the water. surely in this are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful.
as for those who persist in disbelief, it is the same whether you warn them or not—they will never believe.
if you anticipate a split between them, appoint a mediator from his family and another from hers. if they desire reconciliation, allah will restore harmony between them. surely allah is all-knowing, all-aware.
indeed, in the messenger of allah you have an excellent example for whoever has hope in allah and the last day, and remembers allah often.
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury. and allah is self-sufficient, most forbearing.
˹they were˺ created from a spurting fluid,
secret talks are only inspired by satan to grieve the believers. yet he cannot harm them whatsoever except by allah’s will. so in allah let the believers put their trust.
indeed, allah is the one who causes seeds and fruit stones to sprout. he brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. that is allah! how can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺?
and the mountains like ˹tufts of˺ wool.
to him belong all those in the heavens and the earth. and those nearest to him are not too proud to worship him, nor do they tire.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “he is allah—one ˹and indivisible˺;
pharaoh said, “if you have come with a sign, then bring it if what you say is true.”
they cannot listen to the highest assembly ˹of angels˺ for they are pelted from every side,
one of them will say, “i once had a companion ˹in the world˺
follow those who ask no reward of you, and are ˹rightly˺ guided.
bid your people to pray, and be diligent in ˹observing˺ it. we do not ask you to provide. it is we who provide for you. and the ultimate outcome is ˹only˺ for ˹the people of˺ righteousness.
and they carry your loads to ˹distant˺ lands which you could not otherwise reach without great hardship. surely your lord is ever gracious, most merciful.
beware of a trial that will not only affect the wrongdoers among you. and know that allah is severe in punishment.
be patient ˹o prophet˺ with what they say. and remember our servant, david, the man of strength. indeed, he ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to allah˺.
they will never be denied the reward for any good they have done. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of those mindful ˹of him˺.
they were truly ˹two˺ of our faithful servants.
it is allah who has raised the heavens without pillars—as you can see—then established himself on the throne. he has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. he conducts the whole affair. he makes the signs clear so that you may be certain of the meeting with your lord.
they devised every plot, which was fully known to allah, but their plotting was not enough to ˹even˺ overpower mountains ˹let alone allah˺.
so be steadfast in faith in all uprightness ˹o prophet˺—the natural way of allah which he has instilled in ˹all˺ people. let there be no change in this creation of allah. that is the straight way, but most people do not know.
and we made them an example and a lesson for those after them.
he then instructed ˹them˺, “o my sons! do not enter ˹the city˺ all through one gate, but through separate gates. i cannot help you against ˹what is destined by˺ allah in the least. it is only allah who decides. in him i put my trust. and in him let the faithful put their trust.”
and to the people of midian we sent their brother shu’aib. he said, “o my people! worship allah. you have no god other than him. and do not give short measure and weight. i do see you in prosperity now, but i truly fear for you the torment of an overwhelming day.
we certainly tested those before them. and ˹in this way˺ allah will clearly distinguish between those who are truthful and those who are liars.
or does he have daughters ˹as you claim˺, while you ˹prefer to˺ have sons?
every soul will be paid in full for its deeds, for allah knows best what they have done.
he said, “o my people! consider if i stand on a clear proof from my lord and he has blessed me with a good provision from him. i do not want to do what i am forbidding you from. i only intend reform to the best of my ability. my success comes only through allah. in him i trust and to him i turn.
when it is said to them: “believe in what allah has revealed,” they reply, “we only believe in what was sent down to us,” and they deny what came afterwards, though it is the truth confirming their own scriptures! ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “why then did you kill allah’s prophets before, if you are ˹truly˺ believers?”
when you ˹o prophet˺ are ˹campaigning˺ with them and you lead them in prayer, let one group of them pray with you—while armed. when they prostrate themselves, let the other group stand guard behind them. then the group that has not yet prayed will then join you in prayer—and let them be vigilant and armed. the disbelievers would wish to see you neglect your weapons and belongings, so they could launch a sweeping assault on you. but there is no blame if you lay aside your weapons when overcome by heavy rain or illness—but take precaution. indeed, allah has prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹it is˺ allah ˹who˺ gives you life, then causes you to die, then will gather you ˹all˺ on the day of judgment, about which there is no doubt. but most people do not know.”
and those who diligently drive ˹the clouds˺,
indeed, we sent against them a furious wind, on a day of unrelenting misery,
and he entered his property, while wronging his soul, saying, “i do not think this will ever perish,
whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. and whoever does evil, it is to their own loss. then to your lord you will ˹all˺ be returned.
had there been other gods besides allah in the heavens or the earth, both ˹realms˺ would have surely been corrupted. so glorified is allah, lord of the throne, far above what they claim.
and give food—despite their desire for it—to the poor, the orphan, and the captive,
why then ˹are you helpless˺ when the soul ˹of a dying person˺ reaches ˹their˺ throat,
or that he will not seize them while they go about ˹their day˺, for then they will have no escape?
so be patient ˹o prophet˺ with what they say. and glorify the praises of your lord before sunrise and before sunset, and glorify him in the hours of the night and at both ends of the day, so that you may be pleased ˹with the reward˺.
and some of them look at you, but can you guide the blind even though they cannot see?
then he makes the way easy for them,
and among his signs are the ships like mountains ˹sailing˺ in the sea.
it is allah’s will to make things clear to you, guide you to the ˹noble˺ ways of those before you, and turn to you in mercy. for allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
as for those who believed and did good, they will be rejoicing in a garden.
but allah never delays a soul when its appointed time comes. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
so that you may sit firmly on their backs, and remember your lord’s blessings once you are settled on them, saying, “glory be to the one who has subjected these for us, for we could have never done so ˹on our own˺.
in fact, on that day they will be ˹fully˺ submissive.
˹who will be told,˺ “o my servants! there is no fear for you today, nor will you grieve—
if only they were faithful and mindful ˹of allah˺, there would have been a better reward from allah, if only they knew!
moses replied, “you know well that none has sent these ˹signs˺ down except the lord of the heavens and the earth as insights. and i really think that you, o pharaoh, are doomed.”
and when the earth is flattened out,
but i am truly most forgiving to whoever repents, believes, and does good, then persists on ˹true˺ guidance.”
there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. he ˹alone˺ gives life and causes death. ˹he is˺ your lord, and the lord of your forefathers.
and great perfection, who once rose to ˹his˺ true form
about the wicked ˹who will then be asked˺:
ṭa-sĩn. these are the verses of the quran; the clear book.
as for those who had settled in the city and ˹embraced˺ the faith before ˹the arrival of˺ the emigrants, they love whoever immigrates to them, never having a desire in their hearts for whatever ˹of the gains˺ is given to the emigrants. they give ˹the emigrants˺ preference over themselves even though they may be in need. and whoever is saved from the selfishness of their own souls, it is they who are ˹truly˺ successful.
they say ˹mockingly˺, “our lord! hasten for us our share ˹of the punishment˺ before the day of reckoning.”
establish prayer, and be mindful of him. to him you will all be gathered together.
whose fruit will hang within reach.
only when they see what they have been threatened with will they know who is weaker in helpers and inferior in manpower.
as for those who repent, believe, and do good ˹in this world˺, it is right to hope that they will be among the successful.
and when the wrongdoers face the punishment, it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be delayed ˹from it˺.
but when the sight is stunned,
and one of his signs is that the heavens and the earth persist by his command. then when he calls you out of the earth just once, you will instantly come forth.
and that to your lord ˹alone˺ is the ultimate return ˹of all things˺.
absolutely! those who honour their trusts and shun evil—surely allah loves those who are mindful ˹of him˺.
surely hell is one of the mightiest catastrophes—
and he is the one who gave you life, then will cause you to die, and then will bring you back to life. ˹but˺ surely humankind is ever ungrateful.
allah is ever kind to his servants. he provides ˹abundantly˺ to whoever he wills. and he is the all-powerful, almighty.
near which is the garden of ˹eternal˺ residence—
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i do not ask you for any reward for this ˹quran˺, nor do i pretend to be someone i am not.
whether you die or are martyred—all of you will be gathered before allah.
allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills of his servants. surely allah has ˹full˺ knowledge of everything.
˹they were condemned˺ for breaking their covenant, rejecting allah’s signs, killing the prophets unjustly, and for saying, “our hearts are unreceptive!”—it is allah who has sealed their hearts for their disbelief, so they do not believe except for a few—
as for those who deny our signs, they are the people of the left.
a tongue, and two lips;
then after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs, but they wrongfully rejected them. see what was the end of the corruptors!
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “who rescues you from the darkest times on land and at sea? he ˹alone˺ you call upon with humility, openly and secretly: “if you rescue us from this, we will be ever grateful.”
but when he approached it, he was called, “o moses!
did you not see how your lord dealt with ’ȃd—
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i do not find in what has been revealed to me anything forbidden to eat except carrion, running blood, swine—which is impure—or a sinful offering in the name of any other than allah. but if someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate need—then surely your lord is all-forgiving, most merciful.”
moses replied, “˹he is˺ the lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith.”
they are aware of allah’s favours, but still deny them. and most of them are ˹truly˺ ungrateful.
to an orphaned relative
they argued, “o salih! we truly had high hopes in you before this. how dare you forbid us to worship what our forefathers had worshipped? we are certainly in alarming doubt about what you are inviting us to.”
and blessed abraham ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
what do those who fabricate lies against allah expect on judgment day? surely allah is ever bountiful to humanity, but most of them are ungrateful.
woe to every backbiter, slanderer,
while on the highest point above the horizon,
and penetrating into the heart of enemy lines!
and the day as it breaks!
he will guide them ˹to their reward˺, improve their condition,
and do not disgrace me on the day all will be resurrected—
if you are rejected by them, so too were messengers before you. and to allah ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺.
in fact, the wrongdoers merely follow their desires with no knowledge. who then can guide those allah has left to stray? they will have no helpers.
then he came out before his people in all his glamour. those who desired the life of this world wished, “if only we could have something like what korah has been given. he is truly a man of great fortune!”
o believers! do not take your parents and siblings as trusted allies if they choose disbelief over belief. and whoever of you does so, they are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers.
and remove the impediment from my tongue
arguing, “how can we follow one ˹average˺ human being from among us? we would then truly be misguided and insane.
that is because allah ˹alone˺ is the truth and what they invoke besides him is falsehood, and ˹because˺ allah ˹alone˺ is the most high, all-great.
indeed, we settled the children of israel in a blessed land, surely your lord will judge between them on the day of judgment regarding their differences.
adding, “do you see this one you honoured above me? if you delay my end until the day of judgment, i will certainly take hold of his descendants, except for a few.”
as for female and male fornicators, give each of them one hundred lashes, and do not let pity for them make you lenient in ˹enforcing˺ the law of allah, if you ˹truly˺ believe in allah and the last day. and let a number of believers witness their punishment.
˹but˺ if you do not believe me, then let me be.”
and by the seas set on fire!
and do not lie in ambush on every road—threatening and hindering those who believe in allah from his path and striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked. remember when you were few, then he increased you in number. and consider the fate of the corruptors!
prepare against them what you ˹believers˺ can of ˹military˺ power and cavalry to deter allah’s enemies and your enemies as well as other enemies unknown to you but known to allah. whatever you spend in the cause of allah will be paid to you in full and you will not be wronged.
lost indeed are those who have murdered their own children foolishly out of ignorance and have forbidden what allah has provided for them—falsely attributing lies to allah. they have certainly strayed and are not ˹rightly˺ guided.
to obey and speak rightly. then when fighting was ordained, it surely would have been better for them if they were true to allah.
and there came some travellers, and they sent their water-boy who let down his bucket into the well. he cried out, “oh, what a great find! here is a boy!” and they took him secretly ˹to be sold˺ as merchandise, but allah is all-knowing of what they did.
miserable is the price they have sold their souls for—denying allah’s revelation and resenting allah for granting his grace to whoever he wills of his servants! they have earned wrath upon wrath. and such disbelievers will suffer a humiliating punishment.
and as soon as they are called to allah and his messenger so he may judge between them, a group of them turns away.
yet he is hungry for more.
by the clear book!
and build the ark under our ˹watchful˺ eyes and directions, and do not plead with me for those who have done wrong, for they will surely be drowned.”
additionally, we gave moses the scripture, completing the favour upon those who do good, detailing everything, and as a guide and a mercy, so perhaps they would be certain of the meeting with their lord.
then after distress, he sent down serenity in the form of drowsiness overcoming some of you, while others were disturbed by evil thoughts about allah—the thoughts of ˹pre-islamic˺ ignorance. they ask, “do we have a say in the matter?” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “all matters are destined by allah.” they conceal in their hearts what they do not reveal to you. they say ˹to themselves˺, “if we had any say in the matter, none of us would have come to die here.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “even if you were to remain in your homes, those among you who were destined to be killed would have met the same fate.” through this, allah tests what is within you and purifies what is in your hearts. and allah knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
˹for˺ indeed, we ˹alone˺ created humans from a drop of mixed fluids, ˹in order˺ to test them, so we made them hear and see.
from transforming and recreating you in forms unknown to you.
o moses! it is truly i. i am allah—the almighty, all-wise.
in each will be two gushing springs.
then allah revealed to his servant what he revealed ˹through gabriel˺.
we never require of any soul more than what it can afford. and with us is a record which speaks the truth. none will be wronged.
and when the earth throws out ˹all˺ its contents,
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. whether you reveal what is in your hearts or conceal it, allah will call you to account for it. he forgives whoever he wills, and punishes whoever he wills. and allah is most capable of everything.
conveying to you my lord’s messages and giving you ˹sincere˺ advice. and i know from allah what you do not know.
and you were not at the side of mount ṭûr when we called out ˹to moses˺. but ˹you have been sent˺ as a mercy from your lord to warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so perhaps they may be mindful.
allah is the one who created seven heavens ˹in layers˺, and likewise for the earth. the ˹divine˺ command descends between them so you may know that allah is most capable of everything and that allah certainly encompasses all things in ˹his˺ knowledge.
they ask you ˹o prophet˺, “is this true?” say, “yes, by my lord! most certainly it is true! and you will have no escape.”
salih said, “here is a camel. she will have her turn to drink as you have yours, each on an appointed day.
indeed, those who do not believe in the hereafter label angels as female,
and relate to them ˹o prophet˺ the story of the one to whom we gave our signs, but he abandoned them, so satan took hold of him, and he became a deviant.
˹consider, o prophet,˺ the day we will call against every faith-community a witness of their own. and we will call you to be a witness against these ˹people of yours˺. we have revealed to you the book as an explanation of all things, a guide, a mercy, and good news for those who ˹fully˺ submit.
so be steadfast as you are commanded ˹o prophet˺, along with those who turn ˹in submission to allah˺ with you. and do not transgress. surely he is all-seeing of what you ˹believers˺ do.
woe then to the disbelievers when they face their day which they are warned of!
when they came into david’s presence, he was startled by them. they said, “have no fear. ˹we are merely˺ two in a dispute: one of us has wronged the other. so judge between us with truth—do not go beyond ˹it˺—and guide us to the right way.
and ˹other˺ faces will be gloomy,
so when she arrived, it was said ˹to her˺, “is your throne like this?” she replied, “it looks to be the same. we have ˹already˺ received knowledge ˹of solomon’s prophethood˺ and have submitted ˹to allah˺.”
o believers! be mindful of allah and be with the truthful.
we taught him the art of making body armour to protect you in battle. will you then be grateful?
like the boiling of hot water.
allah commanded, “then get out of paradise, for you are truly cursed.
when allah’s ˹ultimate˺ help comes and the victory ˹over mecca is achieved˺,
indeed, when satan whispers to those mindful ˹of allah˺, they remember ˹their lord˺ then they start to see ˹things˺ clearly.
we have surely sent you with the truth as a deliverer of good news and a warner. there is no community that has not had a warner.
the polytheists will argue, “had it been allah’s will, neither we nor our forefathers would have associated others with him ˹in worship˺ or made anything unlawful.” likewise, those before them rejected the truth until they tasted our punishment. ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “do you have any knowledge that you can produce for us? surely you follow nothing but ˹false˺ assumptions and you do nothing but lie.”
he answered, “did i not tell you that you cannot have patience with me?”
if you question them, they will certainly say, “we were only talking idly and joking around.” say, “was it allah, his revelations, and his messenger that you ridiculed?”
so, surely with hardship comes ease.
he was truly one of our faithful servants.
those who believe and do good will be admitted into gardens, under which rivers flow—to stay there forever by the will of their lord—where they will be greeted with “peace!”
in their stories there is truly a lesson for people of reason. this message cannot be a fabrication, rather ˹it is˺ a confirmation of previous revelation, a detailed explanation of all things, a guide, and a mercy for people of faith.
but if they argue with you, then say, “allah knows best what you do.”
then we changed their adversity to prosperity until they flourished and argued ˹falsely˺, “our forefathers ˹too˺ had been visited by adversity and prosperity.” so we seized them by surprise, while they were unaware.
o believers! have faith in allah, his messenger, the book he has revealed to his messenger, and the scriptures he revealed before. indeed, whoever denies allah, his angels, his books, his messengers, and the last day has clearly gone far astray.
they have not shown allah his proper reverence—when on the day of judgment the ˹whole˺ earth will be in his grip, and the heavens will be rolled up in his right hand. glorified and exalted is he above what they associate ˹with him˺!
we ˹later˺ gave him good news of isaac—a prophet, and one of the righteous.
in the name of allah—the most compassionate, most merciful.
you will remember what i say to you, and i entrust my affairs to allah. surely allah is all-seeing of all ˹his˺ servants.”
do they have feet to walk with? or hands to hold with? or eyes to see with? or ears to hear with? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “call upon your associate-gods and conspire against me without delay!
they said, “call upon your lord to clarify for us what type ˹of cow˺ it should be!” he replied, “allah says, ‘the cow should neither be old nor young but in between. so do as you are commanded!’”
so you ˹o prophet˺ certainly cannot make the dead hear ˹the truth˺. nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and walk away.
he ˹fully˺ knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them. they do not intercede except for whom he approves, and they tremble in awe of him.
as for those who believe and whose descendants follow them in faith, we will elevate their descendants to their rank, never discounting anything ˹of the reward˺ of their deeds. every person will reap only what they sowed.
and it was revealed to noah, “none of your people will believe except those who already have. so do not be distressed by what they have been doing.
she said, “this is the one for whose love you criticized me! i did try to seduce him but he ˹firmly˺ refused. and if he does not do what i order him to, he will certainly be imprisoned and ˹fully˺ disgraced.”
they are ˹both just˺ like those who recently went down before them: they tasted the evil consequences of their doings. and they will suffer a painful punishment.
truly, abraham was forbearing, tender-hearted, and ever turning ˹to his lord˺.
your lord is the self-sufficient, full of mercy. if he wills, he can do away with you and replace you with whoever he wills, just as he produced you from the offspring of other people.
o believers! why do you say what you do not do?
i have put my trust in allah—my lord and your lord. there is no living creature that is not completely under his control.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o my people! persist in your ways, for i ˹too˺ will persist in mine. you will soon know who will fare best in the end. indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed.”
˹all will be˺ on jewelled thrones,
and allah establishes the truth by his words—even to the dismay of the wicked.”
ask ˹the people of˺ the land where we were and the caravan we travelled with. we are certainly telling the truth.’”
and indeed, the warnings ˹also˺ came to the people of pharaoh.
our lord! grant us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not put us to shame on judgment day—for certainly you never fail in your promise.”
so the angels prostrated all together—
they said, “we ˹only˺ wish to eat from it to reassure our hearts, to verify you are indeed truthful to us, and to become its witnesses.”
have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? they were far superior in might; they cultivated the land and developed it more than these ˹meccans˺ ever have. their messengers came to them with clear proofs. allah would have never wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves.
never think of those martyred in the cause of allah as dead. in fact, they are alive with their lord, well provided for—
moses warned the magicians, “woe to you! do not fabricate a lie against allah, or he will wipe you out with a torment. whoever fabricates ˹lies˺ is bound to fail.”
but pharaoh was carried away by his power, saying ˹of moses˺, “a magician or a madman!”
again, no! you will soon come to know.
most of them follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions. ˹and˺ surely assumptions can in no way replace the truth. allah is indeed all-knowing of what they do.
and delivered them and their people from the great distress.
and as for those who are given their record ˹in their left hand˺ from behind their backs,
and surely hell is their destined place, all together.
that is their reward for rejecting our signs and asking ˹mockingly˺, “when we are reduced to bones and ashes, will we really be raised as a new creation?”
do not grieve for them, nor be distressed by their schemes.
he will ask ˹them˺, “how many years did you remain on earth?”
allah said, “you are delayed ˹until the appointed day˺.”
we would surely be fabricating a lie against allah if we were to return to your faith after allah has saved us from it. it does not befit us to return to it unless it is the will of allah, our lord. our lord has encompassed everything in ˹his˺ knowledge. in allah we trust. our lord! judge between us and our people with truth. you are the best of those who judge.”
when the first of the two warnings would come to pass, we would send against you some of our servants of great might, who would ravage your homes. this would be a warning fulfilled.
those who avoid major sins and shameful deeds, despite ˹stumbling on˺ minor sins. surely your lord is infinite in forgiveness. he knew well what would become of you as he created you from the earth so do not ˹falsely˺ elevate yourselves. he knows best who is ˹truly˺ righteous.
and those who guard their chastity
fight those who do not believe in allah and the last day, nor comply with what allah and his messenger have forbidden, nor embrace the religion of truth from among those who were given the scripture, willingly submitting, fully humbled.
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book, ˹which is˺ recited to them. surely in this ˹quran˺ is a mercy and reminder for people who believe.
they descend upon every sinful liar,
have they not seen how many ˹disbelieving˺ peoples we destroyed before them? we had made them more established in the land than you. we sent down abundant rain for them and made rivers flow at their feet. then we destroyed them for their sins and replaced them with other peoples.
we ordained for them in the torah, “a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth—and for wounds equal retaliation.” but whoever waives it charitably, it will be atonement for them. and those who do not judge by what allah has revealed are ˹truly˺ the wrongdoers.
˹it is˺ a book whose verses are perfectly explained—a quran in arabic for people who know,
who created you, fashioned you, and perfected your design,
then ˹before the torment˺ we evacuated the believers from the city.
kill them wherever you come upon them is far worse than killing. and do not fight them at the sacred mosque unless they attack you there. if they do so, then fight them—that is the reward of the disbelievers.
and as for the deviant, they will be fuel for hell.’”
so put your trust in allah, for you are surely upon the ˹path of˺ clear truth.
it is allah who made cattle for you so that you may ride some and eat others.
the righteous will say, “praise be to allah who has fulfilled his promise to us, and made us inherit the ˹everlasting˺ land to settle in paradise wherever we please.” how excellent is the reward of those who work ˹righteousness˺!
and the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree, uprooted from the earth, having no stability.
similarly, when your lord brought you ˹o prophet˺ out of your home for a just cause, a group of believers was totally against it.
and whenever i invite them to be forgiven by you, they press their fingers into their ears, cover themselves with their clothes, persist ˹in denial˺, and act very arrogantly.
did you then think that we had created you without purpose, and that you would never be returned to us?”
believe in allah and his messenger, and donate from what he has entrusted you with. so those of you who believe and donate will have a mighty reward.
and for their denial and outrageous accusation against mary,
and he did see that ˹angel˺ on the clear horizon,
indeed, i found a woman ruling over them, who has been given everything ˹she needs˺, and who has a magnificent throne.
he replied, “i am better than he is: you created me from fire and him from clay.”
shun all sin—open and secret. indeed, those who commit sin will be punished for what they earn.
and a fifth oath that allah may be displeased with her if he is telling the truth.
the messenger has cried, “o my lord! my people have indeed received this quran with neglect.”
˹that light shines˺ through houses ˹of worship˺ which allah has ordered to be raised, and where his name is mentioned. he is glorified there morning and evening
we will remove whatever bitterness they had in their hearts. rivers will flow under their feet. and they will say, “praise be to allah for guiding us to this. we would have never been guided if allah had not guided us. the messengers of our lord had certainly come with the truth.” it will be announced to them, “this is paradise awarded to you for what you used to do.”
almost bursting in fury. every time a group is cast into it, its keepers will ask them, “did a warner not come to you?”
and the sun and the moon are brought together,
so do not falter or cry for peace, for you will have the upper hand and allah is with you. and he will never let your deeds go to waste.
but when he tests them by limiting their provision, they protest, “my lord has ˹undeservedly˺ humiliated me!”
there they will have whatever they desire, and with us is ˹even˺ more.
whatever ˹pleasure˺ you have been given is ˹no more than a fleeting˺ enjoyment of this worldly life. but what is with allah is far better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord;
˹it was revealed to salih,˺ “they will soon know who the boastful liar is.
when our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers ask the believers ˹mockingly˺, “which of the two of us is better in status and superior in assembly?”
when they saw our punishment, they cried, “˹now˺ we believe in allah alone and reject what we had been associating with him!”
whoever chooses to be guided, it is only for their own good. and whoever chooses to stray, it is only to their own loss. no soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. and we would never punish ˹a people˺ until we have sent a messenger ˹to warn them˺.
and the earth and ˹the one˺ who spread it!
and leave those who take this faith ˹of islam˺ as mere play and amusement and are deluded by ˹their˺ worldly life. yet remind them by this ˹quran˺, so no one should be ruined for their misdeeds. they will have no protector or intercessor other than allah. even if they were to offer every ˹possible˺ ransom, none will be accepted from them. those are the ones who will be ruined for their misdeeds. they will have a boiling drink and painful punishment for their disbelief.
and in ˹the story of˺ thamûd ˹was another lesson,˺ when they were told, “enjoy yourselves ˹only˺ for a ˹short˺ while.”
allah—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. so in allah let the believers put their trust.
taught humanity what they knew not.
the devil threatens you with ˹the prospect of˺ poverty and bids you to the shameful deed ˹of stinginess˺, while allah promises you forgiveness and ˹great˺ bounties from him. and allah is all-bountiful, all-knowing.
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers, and later you take spoils from them, then pay those whose wives have gone, the equivalent of whatever ˹dowry˺ they had paid. and be mindful of allah, in whom you believe.
˹they prayed to allah,˺ “our lord! we believe in your revelations and follow the messenger, so count us among those who bear witness.”
when we show favour to someone, they turn away, acting arrogantly. and when touched with evil, they make endless prayers ˹for good˺.
those ˹angels˺ who carry the throne and those around it glorify the praises of their lord, have faith in him, and seek forgiveness for the believers, ˹praying:˺ “our lord! you encompass everything in ˹your˺ mercy and knowledge. so forgive those who repent and follow your way, and protect them from the torment of the hellfire.
surely, what you are promised will come to pass.
then one will have neither power nor ˹any˺ helper.
o humanity! indeed, you are labouring restlessly towards your lord, and will ˹eventually˺ meet the consequences.
and ˹fine˺ cushions lined up,
the day ˹all˺ people will stand before the lord of all worlds?
all living beings roaming the earth and winged birds soaring in the sky are communities like yourselves. then to their lord they will be gathered all together.
˹luqman added,˺ “o my dear son! ˹even˺ if a deed were the weight of a mustard seed—be it ˹hidden˺ in a rock or in the heavens or the earth—allah will bring it forth. surely allah is most subtle, all-aware.
in it will be a running spring,
he is the one who has made the night for you as a cover, and ˹made˺ sleep for resting, and the day for rising.
who has perfected everything he created. and he originated the creation of humankind from clay.
and you will certainly know its truth before long.”
and we did leave ˹some of˺ its ruins as a clear lesson for people of understanding.
he has ordained for you ˹believers˺ the way which he decreed for noah, and what we have revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ and what we decreed for abraham, moses, and jesus, ˹commanding:˺ “uphold the faith, and make no divisions in it.” what you call the polytheists to is unbearable for them. allah chooses for himself whoever he wills, and guides to himself whoever turns ˹to him˺.
we have indeed made whatever is on earth as an adornment for it, in order to test which of them is best in deeds.
indeed, the believers, jews, sabians and christians—whoever ˹truly˺ believes in allah and the last day and does good, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
that is jesus, son of mary. ˹and this is˺ a word of truth, about which they dispute.
honour allah’s covenant when you make a pledge, and do not break your oaths after confirming them, having made allah your guarantor. surely allah knows all you do.
as for those who repent, believe, and do good deeds, they are the ones whose evil deeds allah will change into good deeds. for allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
˹they are˺ those who do not bear false witness, and when they come across falsehood, they pass ˹it˺ by with dignity.
whatever blessings you have are from allah. then whenever hardship touches you, to him ˹alone˺ you cry ˹for help˺.
who hinder ˹others˺ from allah’s path, striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked, and disbelieve in the hereafter.
fight in the cause of allah ˹only˺ against those who wage war against you, but do not exceed the limits. allah does not like transgressors.
the people of lot ˹also˺ rejected the warnings.
they will cry, “woe to us! who has raised us up from our place of rest? this must be what the most compassionate warned us of; the messengers told the truth!”
the people of the book demand that you ˹o prophet˺ bring down for them a revelation in writing from heaven. they demanded what is even greater than this from moses, saying, “make allah visible to us!” so a thunderbolt struck them for their wrongdoing. then they took the calf for worship after receiving clear signs. still we forgave them for that ˹after their repentance˺ and gave moses compelling proof.
yet when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him ˹alone˺, the pagans almost swarmed over him.
o believers! do not enter the homes of the prophet without permission ˹and if invited˺ for a meal, do not ˹come too early and˺ linger until the meal is ready. but if you are invited, then enter ˹on time˺. once you have eaten, then go on your way, and do not stay for casual talk. such behaviour is truly annoying to the prophet, yet he is too shy to ask you to leave. but allah is never shy of the truth. and when you ˹believers˺ ask his wives for something, ask them from behind a barrier. this is purer for your hearts and theirs. and it is not right for you to annoy the messenger of allah, nor ever marry his wives after him. this would certainly be a major offence in the sight of allah.
if they deny you, then say, “my deeds are mine and your deeds are yours. you are free of what i do and i am free of what you do!”
so fear allah, and obey me.”
from the evil of the lurking whisperer—
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “whoever is an enemy of gabriel should know that he revealed this ˹quran˺ to your heart by allah’s will, confirming what came before it—a guide and good news for the believers.”
from the right and the left, in groups ˹to mock you˺?
allah said, “this is the way, binding on me:
˹consider˺ the day ˹when˺ the enemies of allah will be gathered for the fire, all driven in ranks.
they both pleaded, “our lord! we fear that he may be quick to harm us or act tyrannically.”
you ˹believers˺ will surely be tested in your wealth and yourselves, and you will certainly hear many hurtful words from those who were given the scripture before you and ˹from˺ the polytheists. but if you are patient and mindful ˹of allah˺—surely this is a resolve to aspire to.
no soul can imagine what delights are kept in store for them as a reward for what they used to do.
spreading much corruption there.
˹o˺ descendants of those we carried with noah ˹in the ark˺! he was indeed a grateful servant.”
it will summon whoever turned their backs ˹on allah˺ and turned away ˹from the truth˺,
bring ˹back˺ our forefathers, if what you say is true.”
it is prescribed that when death approaches any of you—if they leave something of value—a will should be made in favour of parents and immediate family with fairness. ˹this is˺ an obligation on those who are mindful ˹of allah˺.
choking food, and a painful punishment ˹in store for them˺
and to the people of ’ad we sent their brother hûd. he said, “o my people! worship allah—you have no other god except him. will you not then fear him?”
when our clear revelations are recited to them, those who do not expect to meet us say ˹to the prophet˺, “bring us a different quran or make some changes in it.” say ˹to them˺, “it is not for me to change it on my own. i only follow what is revealed to me. i fear, if i were to disobey my lord, the punishment of a tremendous day.”
return to your lord, well pleased ˹with him˺ and well pleasing ˹to him˺.
˹the deniers’˺ hearts on that day will be trembling ˹in horror˺,
establish prayer ˹o prophet˺ at both ends of the day and in the early part of the night. surely good deeds wipe out evil deeds. that is a reminder for the mindful.
send him out with us tomorrow so that he may enjoy himself and play. and we will really watch over him.”
we truly chose them for the honour of proclaiming the hereafter.
your lord knows best all those in the heavens and the earth. and we have surely favoured some prophets above others, and to david we gave the psalms.
or do they say, “˹he is˺ a poet, for whom we ˹eagerly˺ await an ill-fate!”?
this is certainly a revelation from the lord of all worlds,
which will take them by surprise when they least expect ˹it˺.
and so your lord’s decree has been proven true against the disbelievers—that they will be the inmates of the fire.
and he alone is the lord of sirius.
in it they will groan, and will not be able to hear.
do you ˹believers still˺ expect them to be true to you, though a group of them would hear the word of allah then knowingly corrupt it after understanding it?
surely you ˹pagans˺ and whatever ˹idols˺ you worship
when shackles will be around their necks and chains ˹on their legs˺. they will be dragged
and from the evil of those ˹witches casting spells by˺ blowing onto knots,
let your adopted children keep their family names. that is more just in the sight of allah. but if you do not know their fathers, then they are ˹simply˺ your fellow believers and close associates. there is no blame on you for what you do by mistake, but ˹only˺ for what you do intentionally. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
o believers, if an evildoer brings you any news, verify ˹it˺ so you do not harm people unknowingly, becoming regretful for what you have done.
˹they will be told,˺ “this ˹punishment˺ is for being prideful on earth unjustly and for acting arrogantly.
so be patient ˹o prophet˺. surely allah’s promise is true. whether we show you some of what we threaten them with, or cause you to die ˹before that˺, to us they will ˹all˺ be returned.
˹remember˺ when two groups among you ˹believers˺ were about to cower, then allah reassured them. so in allah let the believers put their trust.
and remember our servant job, when he cried out to his lord, “satan has afflicted me with distress and suffering.”
here you are! you love them but they do not love you, and you believe in all scriptures. when they meet you they say, “we believe.” but when alone, they bite their fingertips in rage. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹may you˺ die of your rage!” surely allah knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
ultimately, he cried out to his lord, “these are a wicked people!”
then glorify the praises of your lord and seek his forgiveness, for certainly he is ever accepting of repentance.
so if a husband divorces his wife ˹three times˺, then it is not lawful for him to remarry her until after she has married another man and then is divorced. then it is permissible for them to reunite, as long as they feel they are able to maintain the limits of allah. these are the limits set by allah, which he makes clear for people of knowledge.
and surely your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal.
on that day the sky will be like molten brass
and glorify him during part of the night and at the fading of the stars.
when joseph had provided them with supplies, he slipped the royal cup into his brother’s bag. then a herald cried, “o people of the caravan! you must be thieves!”
are they waiting for allah ˹himself˺ to come to them in the shade of clouds, along with the angels? ˹if he did˺, then the matter would be settled ˹at once˺. and to allah ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺.
and whenever they see a sign, they make fun of it,
˹remember, o prophet,˺ when we sent a group of jinn your way to listen to the quran. then, upon hearing it, they said ˹to one another˺, “listen quietly!” then when it was over, they returned to their fellow jinn as warners.
it is certainly an evil place to settle and reside.”
there are some of them who say, “exempt me and do not expose me to temptation.” they have already fallen into temptation. and hell will surely engulf the disbelievers.
then allah will inflict upon them the major punishment.
whatever new reminder comes to them from their lord, they only listen to it jokingly,
when he cried out to his lord privately,
and indeed, we created humankind from an extract of clay,
the people of the right, how ˹blessed˺ will they be;
humankind is made of haste. i will soon show you my signs, so do not ask me to hasten them.
by the quran, rich in wisdom!
when they meet the believers they say, “we believe.” but when alone with their evil associates they say, “we are definitely with you; we were only mocking.”
his lord called him in the sacred valley of ṭuwa,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i have no power to benefit or protect myself, except by the will of allah.” for each community there is an appointed term. when their time arrives, they cannot delay it for a moment, nor could they advance it.
and certainly those before them denied ˹as well˺, then how severe was my response!
in protest of attributing children to the most compassionate.
we certainly brought the truth to you, but most of you were resentful of the truth.
“peace be upon you for your perseverance. how excellent is the ultimate abode!”
we unleashed upon them a storm of stones. as for ˹the believers of˺ lot’s family, we delivered them before dawn
for allah created the heavens and the earth for a purpose, so that every soul may be paid back for what it has committed. and none will be wronged.
is ˹there any equal to˺ the vigilant one who knows what every soul commits? yet the pagans have associated others with allah ˹in worship˺. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “name them! or do you ˹mean to˺ inform him of something he does not know on the earth? or are these ˹gods˺ just empty words?” in fact, the disbelievers’ falsehood has been made so appealing to them that they have been turned away from the path. and whoever allah leaves to stray will be left with no guide.
our lord! give them double ˹our˺ punishment, and condemn them tremendously.”
and we delivered those who were faithful and were mindful ˹of allah˺.
bless me with honourable mention among later generations.
do you see any of them left alive?
the disbelievers say, “this ˹quran˺ is nothing but a fabrication which he made up with the help of others.” their claim is totally unjustified and untrue!
˹he was told,˺ “now ˹you believe˺? but you always disobeyed and were one of the corruptors.
we cautioned, “o adam! live with your wife in paradise and eat as freely as you please, but do not approach this tree, or else you will be wrongdoers.”
you can only warn those who follow the reminder so give them good news of forgiveness and an honourable reward.
every soul will be detained for what it has done,
on that day ˹other˺ faces will be glowing with bliss,
and when we took your covenant and raised the mountain above you ˹saying˺, “hold firmly to that ˹scripture˺ which we have given you and obey,” they answered, “we hear and disobey.” the love of the calf was rooted in their hearts because of their disbelief. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “how evil is what your ˹so-called˺ belief prompts you to do, if you ˹actually˺ believe ˹in the torah˺!”
when they opened their bags, they discovered that their money had been returned to them. they argued, “o our father! what more can we ask for? here is our money, fully returned to us. now we can buy more food for our family. we will watch over our brother, and obtain an extra camel-load of grain. that load can be easily secured.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “if the ˹eternal˺ home of the hereafter with allah is exclusively for you ˹israelites˺ out of all humanity, then wish for death if what you say is true!”
and there came the men of the city, rejoicing.
or did they create the heavens and the earth? in fact, they have no firm belief ˹in allah˺.
worship allah ˹alone˺ and associate none with him. and be kind to parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, near and distant neighbours, close friends, ˹needy˺ travellers, and those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession. surely allah does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful—
then ˹such a person will have˺ serenity, fragrance, and a garden of bliss.
o believers! when death approaches any of you, call upon two just muslim men to witness as you make a bequest; otherwise, two non-muslims if you are afflicted with death while on a journey. if you doubt ˹their testimony˺, keep them after prayer and let them testify under oath ˹saying˺, “by allah! we would never sell our testimony for any price, even in favour of a close relative, nor withhold the testimony of allah. otherwise, we would surely be sinful.”
and as soon as they are overwhelmed by waves like mountains, they cry out to allah ˹alone˺ in sincere devotion. but when he delivers them ˹safely˺ to shore, only some become relatively grateful. and none rejects our signs except whoever is deceitful, ungrateful.
surely their lord is all-aware of them on that day.
and he is the one who enriches and impoverishes.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “shall we inform you of who will lose the most deeds?
then went to their own people, walking boastfully.
but as for those who are rebellious, the fire will be their home. whenever they try to escape from it, they will be forced back into it, and will be told, “taste the fire’s torment, which you used to deny.”
on that day ˹some˺ faces will be bright,
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.”
you surely cannot guide whoever you like ˹o prophet˺, but it is allah who guides whoever he wills, and he knows best who are ˹fit to be˺ guided.
and thamûd who carved ˹their homes into˺ the rocks in the ˹stone˺ valley;
˹they will be told,˺ “eat and drink happily for what you used to do.”
noah prayed, “my lord! help me, because they have denied ˹me˺.”
and we will inherit what he boasts of, and he will come before us all by himself.
and to the people of ’ad we sent their brother hûd. he said, “o my people! worship allah. you have no god other than him. you do nothing but fabricate lies ˹against allah˺.
and towering palm trees ˹loaded˺ with clustered fruit,
so we destroyed those who were far mightier than these ˹meccans˺. the examples of ˹their˺ predecessors have ˹already˺ been related.
those who say, “allah is the messiah, son of mary,” have certainly fallen into disbelief. the messiah ˹himself˺ said, “o children of israel! worship allah—my lord and your lord.” whoever associates others with allah ˹in worship˺ will surely be forbidden paradise by allah. their home will be the fire. and the wrongdoers will have no helpers.
it has already been revealed to you—and to those ˹prophets˺ before you—that if you associate others ˹with allah˺, your deeds will certainly be void and you will truly be one of the losers.
as for the one who was indifferent,
to give charity publicly is good, but to give to the poor privately is better for you, and will absolve you of your sins. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
will you believe in it only after it has overtaken you? now? but you always wanted to hasten it!”
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the knowledge of what is hidden in the heavens and the earth. and to him all matters are returned. so worship him and put your trust in him. and your lord is never unaware of what you do.
is all this ˹not˺ a sufficient oath for those who have sense?
then turned his back ˹on the truth˺ and acted arrogantly,
causing grain to grow in it,
who will inherit ˹prophethood˺ from me and the family of jacob, and make him, o lord, pleasing ˹to you˺!”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “come! let me recite to you what your lord has forbidden to you: do not associate others with him ˹in worship˺. ˹do not fail to˺ honour your parents. do not kill your children for fear of poverty. we provide for you and for them. do not come near indecencies, openly or secretly. do not take a ˹human˺ life—made sacred by allah—except with ˹legal˺ right. this is what he has commanded you, so perhaps you will understand.
they try to hide ˹their deception˺ from people, but they can never hide it from allah—in whose presence they plot by night what is displeasing to him. and allah is fully aware of what they do.
so turn away from the deniers for a while ˹o prophet˺.
so we opened the gates of the sky with pouring rain,
put your trust in the almighty, most merciful,
say, “all intercession belongs to allah ˹alone˺. to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. then to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.”
who choose disbelievers as allies instead of the believers. do they seek honour and power through that company? surely all honour and power belongs to allah.
that was the case with pharaoh’s people and those before them—they all rejected the signs of their lord, so we destroyed them for their sins and drowned pharaoh’s people. they were all wrongdoers.
but there are some who employ theatrics, only to lead others away from allah’s way—without any knowledge—and to make a mockery of it. they will suffer a humiliating punishment.
we have not revealed the quran to you ˹o prophet˺ to cause you distress,
but no! if he does not desist, we will certainly drag him by the forelock—
until he reached ˹a pass˺ between two mountains. he found in front of them a people who could hardly understand ˹his˺ language.
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers—accepting all; rejecting none—he will surely give them their rewards. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
and we elevated him to an honourable status.
so they rejected them both, and ˹so˺ were among those destroyed.
to those who disbelieve in the hereafter belong all evil qualities, whereas to allah belong the finest attributes. and he is the almighty, all-wise.
do not marry former wives of your fathers—except what was done previously. it was indeed a shameful, despicable, and evil practice.
for there is nothing hidden in the heavens or the earth without being ˹written˺ in a perfect record.
who believe in the unseen, establish prayer, and donate from what we have provided for them,
then and there every soul will face ˹the consequences of˺ what it had done. they all will be returned to allah—their true master. and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them.
he taught adam the names of all things, then he presented them to the angels and said, “tell me the names of these, if what you say is true?”
know that allah revives the earth after its death. we have certainly made the signs clear for you so perhaps you will understand.
indeed, the wicked will be in the torment of hell forever.
now, throw down your staff!” but when he saw it slithering like a snake, he ran away without looking back. ˹allah reassured him,˺ “o moses! do not be afraid! messengers should have no fear in my presence.
and if you are in doubt about what we have revealed to our servant, then produce a sûrah like it and call your helpers other than allah, if what you say is true.
˹it is˺ the star of piercing brightness.
˹they will be told by allah,˺ “this is the day of ˹final˺ decision: we have gathered you along with earlier disbelievers ˹for punishment˺.
and do not trade allah’s covenant for a fleeting gain. what is with allah is certainly far better for you, if only you knew.
we have made it ˹as˺ a reminder ˹of the hellfire˺ and a provision for the travellers.
“if only we had a reminder like ˹those of˺ earlier peoples,
when the chief-envoy came to him, solomon said, “do you offer me wealth? what allah has granted me is far greater than what he has granted you. no! it is you who rejoice in ˹receiving˺ gifts.
he is the only true god in the heavens and the earth. he knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal, and knows whatever you do.
from following after me? how could you disobey my orders?”
he causes the dawn to break, and has made the night for rest and ˹made˺ the sun and the moon ˹to travel˺ with precision. that is the design of the almighty, all-knowing.
moses responded, “no, you go first.” and suddenly their ropes and staffs appeared to him—by their magic—to be slithering.
so they proceeded until they came across a boy, and the man killed him. moses protested, “have you killed an innocent soul, who killed no one? you have certainly done a horrible thing.”
burning in it on judgment day,
it will neither harm ˹them˺, nor will they be intoxicated by it.
they wish to extinguish allah’s light with their mouths, but allah will only allow his light to be perfected, even to the dismay of the disbelievers.
indeed, ˹o prophet,˺ we have sent you as a witness, a deliverer of good news, and a warner,
go forth, you and your brother, with my signs and never falter in remembering me.
the virtuous will be ˹dressed˺ in garments of fine green silk and rich brocade, and adorned with bracelets of silver, and their lord will give them a purifying drink.
when she delivered, she said, “my lord! i have given birth to a girl,”—and allah fully knew what she had delivered—“and the male is not like the female.
bring that soul back, if what you say is true.
facing each other on thrones.
say, “i do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺, but whoever wishes, let them pursue the way to their lord.”
have you considered the fire you kindle?
it is from solomon, and it reads: ‘in the name of allah—the most compassionate, most merciful.
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies allah. for he ˹alone˺ is the almighty, all-wise.
there is no blame on you if you enter public places where there is something of benefit for you. and allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
except those shown mercy by your lord—and so he created them ˹to choose freely˺. and so the word of your lord will be fulfilled: “i will surely fill up hell with jinn and humans all together.”
we raised the mount over them ˹as a warning˺ for ˹breaking˺ their covenant and said, “enter the gate ˹of jerusalem˺ with humility.” we also warned them, “do not break the sabbath,” and took from them a firm covenant.
he chooses whoever he wills to receive his mercy. and allah is the lord of infinite bounty.
indeed, the virtuous will be in bliss,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹yes, even if˺ you become stones, or iron,
and his ˹second˺ coming is truly a sign for the hour. so have no doubt about it, and follow me. this is the straight path.
so allah protected him from the evil of their schemes. and pharaoh’s people were overwhelmed by an evil punishment:
˹remember˺ when those youths took refuge in the cave, and said, “our lord! grant us mercy from yourself and guide us rightly through our ordeal.”
alif-lãm-ra. ˹this is˺ a book whose verses are well perfected and then fully explained. ˹it is˺ from the one ˹who is˺ all-wise, all-aware.
among his signs are the day and the night, the sun and the moon. do not prostrate to the sun or the moon, but prostrate to allah, who created them ˹all˺, if you ˹truly˺ worship him ˹alone˺.
surely nothing on earth or in the heavens is hidden from allah.
except those shown mercy by allah. he is truly the almighty, most merciful.
that ˹worldly punishment˺ is yours, so taste it! then the disbelievers will suffer the torment of the fire.
they said, “woe to us! we have certainly been transgressors.
indeed, allah ˹alone˺ is the supreme provider—lord of all power, ever mighty.
i do swear by the receding stars
o believers! fear allah, and give up outstanding interest if you are ˹true˺ believers.
˹imagine, o prophet,˺ how many societies we destroyed that were far superior in might than your society—which drove you out—and there was none to help them!
perhaps you ˹o prophet˺ will grieve yourself to death over their disbelief.
now, have you considered ˹the idols of˺ lat and ’uzza,
nor any food except ˹oozing˺ pus,
indeed, we created humans in the best form.
so they will both end up in the fire, staying there forever. that is the reward of the wrongdoers.
that ˹eternal˺ home in the hereafter we reserve ˹only˺ for those who seek neither tyranny nor corruption on the earth. the ultimate outcome belongs ˹only˺ to the righteous.
who sees you when you rise ˹for prayer at night˺,
then an ˹overwhelming˺ earthquake struck them, and they fell lifeless in their homes.
they can never inflict harm on you, except a little annoyance. but if they meet you in battle, they will flee and they will have no helpers.
we will certainly test you ˹believers˺ until we prove those of you who ˹truly˺ struggle ˹in allah’s cause˺ and remain steadfast, and reveal how you conduct yourselves.
do you claim that abraham, ishmael, isaac, jacob, and his descendants were all jews or christians?” say, “who is more knowledgeable: you or allah?” who does more wrong than those who hide the testimony they received from allah? and allah is never unaware of what you do.
no one would ask for exemption except those who have no faith in allah or the last day, and whose hearts are in doubt, so they are torn by their doubts.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o my people! persist in your ways, for i ˹too˺ will persist in mine. you will soon come to know
indeed, allah has heard the argument of the woman who pleaded with you ˹o prophet˺ concerning her husband, and appealed to allah. allah has heard your exchange. surely allah is all-hearing, all-seeing.
indeed, if you were to know ˹your fate˺ with certainty, ˹you would have acted differently˺.
it cannot be proven false from any angle. ˹it is˺ a revelation from the ˹one who is˺ all-wise, praiseworthy.
i will approach them from their front, their back, their right, their left, and then you will find most of them ungrateful.”
observe the ˹five obligatory˺ prayers—especially the middle prayer—and stand in true devotion to allah.
o believers! do not enter any house other than your own until you have asked for permission and greeted its occupants. this is best for you, so perhaps you will be mindful.
or do they have a stairway, by which they eavesdrop ˹on the heavens˺? then let those who do so bring a compelling proof.
indeed, we have granted you a clear triumph ˹o prophet˺
some jews take words out of context and say, “we listen and we disobey,” “hear! may you never hear,” and “ra’ina!” [herd us!]—playing with words and discrediting the faith. had they said ˹courteously˺, “we hear and obey,” “listen to us,” and “unẓurna,” [tend to us!] it would have been better for them and more proper. allah has condemned them for their disbelief, so they do not believe except for a few.
know that allah is severe in punishment and that he is all-forgiving, most merciful.
then we caused the earth to swallow him up, along with his home. there was no one to help him against allah, nor could he even help himself.
i have turned my face towards the one who has originated the heavens and the earth—being upright—and i am not one of the polytheists.”
that is because they detest what allah has revealed, so he has rendered their deeds void.
he declared, “this is a mercy from my lord. but when the promise of my lord comes to pass, he will level it to the ground. and my lord’s promise is ever true.”
rejoicing in allah’s bounties and being delighted for those yet to join them. there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
we send down the quran as a healing and mercy for the believers, but it only increases the wrongdoers in loss.
and the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds will unfold before them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule.
our lord! i have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley, near your sacred house, our lord, so that they may establish prayer. so make the hearts of ˹believing˺ people incline towards them and provide them with fruits, so perhaps they will be thankful.
before them, the people of noah denied ˹the truth˺, as did ˹other˺ enemy forces afterwards. every community plotted against its prophet to seize him, and argued in falsehood, ˹hoping˺ to discredit the truth with it. so i seized them. and how ˹horrible˺ was my punishment!
and totally rejected our signs.
neither cool nor refreshing.
let people then consider their food:
he will be before his people on the day of judgment and will lead them into the fire. what an evil place to be led into!
if you ˹idolaters˺ call them to guidance, they cannot hear. and you ˹o prophet˺ may see them facing towards you, but they cannot see.
it is they who have ruined themselves, and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them.
and they are truly extreme in their love of ˹worldly˺ gains.
with the angels on its sides. on that day eight ˹mighty angels˺ will bear the throne of your lord above them.
the night of glory is better than a thousand months.
and a multitude from later generations.
so be steadfast in the upright faith ˹o prophet˺, before the coming of a day from allah that cannot be averted. on that day the people will be divided:
there is no good in most of their secret talks—except those encouraging charity, kindness, or reconciliation between people. and whoever does this seeking allah’s pleasure, we will grant them a great reward.
you have already fulfilled the vision.” indeed, this is how we reward the good-doers.
who taught by the pen—
it was not ˹proper˺ for the people of medina and the nomadic arabs around them to avoid marching with the messenger of allah or to prefer their own lives above his. that is because whenever they suffer from thirst, fatigue, or hunger in the cause of allah; or tread on a territory, unnerving the disbelievers; or inflict any loss on an enemy—it is written to their credit as a good deed. surely allah never discounts the reward of the good-doers.
it is allah who has revealed the book with the truth and the balance ˹of justice˺. you never know, perhaps the hour is near.
and we blessed them ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
at the lote tree of the most extreme limit ˹in the seventh heaven˺—
so do not let those who disbelieve in it and follow their desires distract you from it, or you will be doomed.’”
o my people! i truly fear for you the day all will be crying out ˹to each other˺—
indeed, we have dignified the children of adam, carried them on land and sea, granted them good and lawful provisions, and privileged them far above many of our creatures.
and pharaoh called out to his people, boasting, “o my people! am i not sovereign over egypt as well as ˹all˺ these streams flowing at my feet? can you not see?
one mighty jinn responded, “i can bring it to you before you rise from this council of yours. and i am quite strong and trustworthy for this ˹task˺.”
do you not see that allah is glorified by all those in the heavens and the earth, even the birds as they soar? each ˹instinctively˺ knows their manner of prayer and glorification. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all they do.
those who sat at home, saying about their brothers, “had they listened to us, they would not have been killed.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “try not to die if what you say is true!”
and, ‘be steadfast in faith in all uprightness, and do not be one of the polytheists,’
surely those who believe, do good, and humble themselves before their lord will be the residents of paradise. they will be there forever.
but whoever repents after their wrongdoing and mends their ways, allah will surely turn to them in forgiveness. indeed, allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
how can you disbelieve when allah’s revelations are recited to you and his messenger is in your midst? whoever holds firmly to allah is surely guided to the straight path.
and we showed them signs in which there was a clear test.
not in return for someone’s favours,
allah knows well those among you who discourage ˹others from fighting˺, saying ˹secretly˺ to their brothers, “stay with us,” and who themselves hardly take part in fighting.
and ˹remember˺ when moses said to his people, “allah commands you to sacrifice a cow.” they replied, “are you mocking us?” moses responded, “i seek refuge in allah from acting foolishly!”
it does not befit ˹the majesty of˺ the most compassionate to have children.
˹both will be˺ with lush branches.
on that day we will roll up the heavens like a scroll of writings. just as we produced the first creation, ˹so˺ shall we reproduce it. that is a promise binding on us. we truly uphold ˹our promises˺!
and ejects ˹all˺ its contents and becomes empty,
then he turned towards the heaven when it was ˹still like˺ smoke, saying to it and to the earth, ‘submit, willingly or unwillingly.’ they both responded, ‘we submit willingly.’
˹it is˺ a quran we have revealed in stages so that you may recite it to people at a deliberate pace. and we have sent it down in successive revelations.
let them live where you live ˹during their waiting period˺, according to your means. and do not harass them to make their stay unbearable. if they are pregnant, then maintain them until they deliver. and if they nurse your child, compensate them, and consult together courteously. but if you fail to reach an agreement, then another woman will nurse ˹the child˺ for the father.
and when it is said to them, “donate from what allah has provided for you,” the disbelievers say to the believers, “why should we feed those whom allah could have fed if he wanted to? you are clearly astray!”
and who associate none with their lord,
then afterwards we drowned the rest.
if you are on a journey and a scribe cannot be found, then a security can be taken. if you trust one another, then ˹there is no need for a security, but˺ the debtor should honour this trust ˹by repaying the debt˺—and let them fear allah, their lord. and do not conceal the testimony, for whoever conceals it, their hearts are indeed sinful. and allah ˹fully˺ knows what you do.
indeed, we created man from sounding clay moulded from black mud.
if they deny you, so did those before them. their messengers came to them with clear proofs, divine books, and enlightening scriptures.
then on top of that you will drink boiling water—
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “they will be revived by the one who produced them the first time, for he has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of every created being.
but those gifted with knowledge and faith will say ˹to them˺, “you did actually stay—as destined by allah—until the day of resurrection. so here is the day of resurrection ˹which you denied˺! but you did not know ˹it was true˺.”
who avoid major sins and shameful deeds, and forgive when angered;
do not entrust the incapable ˹among your dependants˺ with your wealth which allah has made a means of support for you—but feed and clothe them from it, and speak to them kindly.
and he certainly saw that ˹angel descend˺ a second time
on that day he will punish ˹them˺ severely, like no other,
˹it will be said,˺ “seize them and drag them into the depths of the hellfire.
and elevated your renown for you?
joseph ordered his servants to put his brothers’ money back into their saddlebags so that they would find it when they returned to their family and perhaps they would come back.
what is the matter with you that you are not in awe of the majesty of allah,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “consider all that is in the heavens and the earth!” yet neither signs nor warners are of any benefit to those who refuse to believe.
muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
˹for˺ when the trumpet will be sounded,
whoever obeys the messenger has truly obeyed allah. but whoever turns away, then ˹know that˺ we have not sent you ˹o prophet˺ as a keeper over them.
and we have certainly made the quran easy to remember. so is there anyone who will be mindful?
then when he wills, he will resurrect them.
and shown them the two ways ˹of right and wrong˺?
they ask you ˹o prophet˺ about ⱬul-qarnain. say, “i will relate to you something of his narrative.”
and ˹remember˺ when we made the sacred house as a site of prayer.” and we entrusted abraham and ishmael to purify my house for those who circle it, who meditate in it, and who bow and prostrate themselves ˹in prayer˺.
say, “this ˹quran˺ is momentous news,
surely those who have believed, emigrated, and struggled in the way of allah—they can hope for allah’s mercy. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
on that day people will proceed in separate groups to be shown ˹the consequences of˺ their deeds.
on the day the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from below their feet. and it will be said, “reap what you sowed.”
you will find others who wish to be safe from you and their own people. yet they cannot resist the temptation ˹of disbelief or hostility˺. if they do not keep away, offer you peace, or refrain from attacking you, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them. we have given you full permission over such people.
indeed, we sent before you ˹o prophet˺ messengers, each to their own people, and they came to them with clear proofs. then we inflicted punishment upon those who persisted in wickedness. for it is our duty to help the believers.
full of power, held in honour by the lord of the throne,
we have certainly sent messengers before you ˹o prophet˺ and blessed them with wives and offspring. it was not for any messenger to bring a sign without allah’s permission. every destined matter has a ˹set˺ time.
if you ˹o prophet˺ do not bring them a sign ˹which they demanded˺, they ask, “why do you not make it yourself?” say, “i only follow what is revealed to me from my lord. this ˹quran˺ is an insight from your lord—a guide and a mercy for those who believe.”
they say, “if only ˹some˺ signs had been sent down to him from his lord!” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “signs are only with allah. and i am only sent with a clear warning.”
we never sent any messenger before you ˹o prophet˺, who did not eat food and go about in market-places. we have made some of you a trial for others. will you ˹not then˺ be patient? and your lord is all-seeing.
we have narrated to you ˹o prophet˺ some of the stories of those societies. surely, their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but still they would not believe in what they had already denied. this is how allah seals the hearts of the disbelievers.
there is sickness in their hearts, and allah ˹only˺ lets their sickness increase. they will suffer a painful punishment for their lies.
and ˹we subjected to him˺ every builder and diver of the jinn,
o believers! when you face an enemy, stand firm and remember allah often so you may triumph.
all will then be informed of what they have sent forth and left behind.
on the day the ˹holy˺ spirit and the angels will stand in ranks. none will talk, except those granted permission by the most compassionate and whose words are true.
and the magicians fell down, prostrating.
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “who provides for you from heaven and earth? who owns ˹your˺ hearing and sight? who brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living? and who conducts every affair?” they will ˹surely˺ say, “allah.” say, “will you not then fear ˹him˺?
and when the decree ˹of the hour˺ comes to pass against them, we will bring forth for them a beast from the earth, telling them that the people had no sure faith in our revelations.
and tell them that the ˹drinking˺ water must be divided between them ˹and her˺, each taking a turn to drink ˹every other day˺.”
and who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against allah or reject the truth after it has reached them? is hell not a ˹fitting˺ home for the disbelievers?
they say, “if we return to medina, the honourable will definitely expel the inferior.” but all honour and power belongs to allah, his messenger, and the believers, yet the hypocrites do not know.
and ˹remember˺ when luqman said to his son, while advising him, “o my dear son! never associate ˹anything˺ with allah ˹in worship˺, for associating ˹others with him˺ is truly the worst of all wrongs.”
they abandon their beds, invoking their lord with hope and fear, and donate from what we have provided for them.
indeed, pharaoh ˹arrogantly˺ elevated himself in the land and divided its people into ˹subservient˺ groups, one of which he persecuted, slaughtering their sons and keeping their women. he was truly one of the corruptors.
and the secrets of the hearts will be laid bare—
to whichever of you chooses to take the lead or lag behind.
some nomadic arabs ˹also˺ came with excuses, seeking exemption. and those who were untrue to allah and his messenger remained behind ˹with no excuse˺. the unfaithful among them will be afflicted with a painful punishment.
even if every sign were to come to them—until they see the painful punishment.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o humanity! if you are in doubt of my faith, then ˹know that˺ i do not worship those ˹idols˺ you worship instead of allah. but i worship allah, who has the power to cause your death. and i have been commanded, ‘be one of the believers,’
and to recite the quran.” then whoever chooses to be guided, it is only for their own good. but whoever chooses to stray, say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i am only a warner.”
they promised, “we will try to convince his father to let him come. we will certainly do ˹our best˺.”
do you ˹pagans˺ consider providing the pilgrims with water and maintaining the sacred mosque as equal to believing in allah and the last day and struggling in the cause of allah? they are not equal in allah’s sight. and allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
allah does not forbid you from dealing kindly and fairly with those who have neither fought nor driven you out of your homes. surely allah loves those who are fair.
it is all peace until the break of dawn.
˹for˺ he is certainly the one who originates and resurrects ˹all˺.
indeed, we created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six days,
do not argue with the people of the book unless gracefully, except with those of them who act wrongfully. and say, “we believe in what has been revealed to us and what was revealed to you. our god and your god is ˹only˺ one. and to him we ˹fully˺ submit.”
then the pains of labour drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. she cried, “alas! i wish i had died before this, and was a thing long forgotten!”
we have already been promised this, as well as our forefathers earlier. this is nothing but ancient fables!”
by the sky full of constellations,
and withholding when touched with good—
they replied, “you are simply bewitched!
some of them listen to what you say, but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand?
and he is the one who has dispersed you ˹all˺ over the earth, and to him you will ˹all˺ be gathered.
and both sides called for judgment, so every stubborn tyrant was doomed.
those whose souls the angels seize while they wrong themselves will then offer ˹full˺ submission ˹and say falsely,˺ “we did not do any evil.” ˹the angels will say,˺ “no! surely allah fully knows what you used to do.
˹even˺ the closest ˹to allah˺ of those invoked would be seeking a way to their lord, hoping for his mercy, and fearing his punishment. indeed, your lord’s torment is fearsome.
then it is surely upon us to make it clear ˹to you˺.
go to pharaoh and say, ‘we are messengers from the lord of all worlds,
but those who believe and do good will have a never-ending reward.
moses reassured ˹them˺, “absolutely not! my lord is certainly with me—he will guide me.”
and he has subjected for your benefit the day and the night, the sun and the moon. and the stars have been subjected by his command. surely in this are signs for those who understand.
so he may reward those who believe and do good. it is they who will have forgiveness and an honourable provision.
indeed, what you are promised is true.
and on the day the disbelievers will be exposed to the fire, ˹they will be asked,˺ “is this ˹hereafter˺ not the truth?” they will cry, “absolutely, by our lord!” it will be said, “then taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “surely ˹it is˺ my lord ˹who˺ gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills. but most people do not know.”
one of them said, “do not kill joseph. but if you must do something, throw him into the bottom of a well so perhaps he may be picked up by some travellers.”
whenever we intend to destroy a society, we command its elite ˹to obey allah˺ but they act rebelliously in it. so the decree ˹of punishment˺ is justified, and we destroy it utterly.
˹remember˺ when the angels proclaimed, “o mary! allah gives you good news of a word jesus, son of mary; honoured in this world and the hereafter, and he will be one of those nearest ˹to allah˺.
have they not travelled throughout the land so their hearts may reason, and their ears may listen? indeed, it is not the eyes that are blind, but it is the hearts in the chests that grow blind.
by the grace of your lord, you ˹o prophet˺ are not insane.
and they say, “the most compassionate has offspring!” glory be to him! in fact, those ˹angels˺ are only ˹his˺ honoured servants,
to warn whoever is ˹truly˺ alive and fulfil the decree ˹of torment˺ against the disbelievers.
and put your trust in allah, for allah is sufficient as a trustee of affairs.
if they happen to be aboard a ship ˹caught in a storm˺, they cry out to allah ˹alone˺ in sincere devotion. but as soon as he delivers them ˹safely˺ to shore, they associate ˹others with him once again˺.
have you not seen those who were forbidden from secret talks, yet they ˹always˺ return to what they were forbidden from, conspiring in sin, aggression, and disobedience to the messenger? and when they come to you ˹o prophet˺, they greet you not as allah greets you, and say to one another, “why does allah not punish us for what we say?” hell is enough for them—they will burn in it. and what an evil destination!
but i too am planning.
on that day, those who denied ˹allah˺ and disobeyed the messenger will wish they were reduced to dust. and they will never be able to hide anything from allah.
˹all˺ as a reward for what they used to do.
and he will speak to people in ˹his˺ infancy and adulthood and will be one of the righteous.”
they eagerly listen to falsehood and consume forbidden gain. so if they come to you ˹o prophet˺, either judge between them or turn away from them. if you turn away from them, they cannot harm you whatsoever. but if you judge between them, then do so with justice. surely allah loves those who are just.
˹only then,˺ the believers will ask ˹one another˺, “are these the ones who swore solemn oaths by allah that they were with you?” their deeds have been in vain, so they have become losers.
surely those who believe and do good will have the gardens of bliss,
˹remember˺ when the hypocrites and those with sickness in their hearts said, “these ˹believers˺ are deluded by their faith.” but whoever puts their trust in allah, surely allah is almighty, all-wise.
he added, “there you will live, there you will die, and from there you will be resurrected.”
has he reduced ˹all˺ the gods to one god? indeed, this is something totally astonishing.”
it is certainly upon us ˹alone˺ to show ˹the way to˺ guidance.
but whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it accordingly, and is a ˹true˺ believer, it is they whose striving will be appreciated.
and allah has made your homes a place to rest, and has given you tents from the hide of animals, light to handle when you travel and when you camp. and out of their wool, fur, and hair he has given you furnishings and goods for a while.
what is wrong with you that you cannot speak?”
if ˹non-inheriting˺ relatives, orphans, or the needy are present at the time of distribution, offer them a ˹small˺ provision from it and speak to them kindly.
indeed, ˹it is˺ we ˹who˺ sent this ˹quran˺ down on the night of glory.
and say, “all praise is for allah, who has never had ˹any˺ offspring; and revere him immensely.”
when they advanced to face goliath and his warriors, they prayed, “our lord! shower us with perseverance, make our steps firm, and give us victory over the disbelieving people.”
and there are some who had made a vow to allah: “if he gives us from his bounty, we will surely spend in charity and be of the righteous.”
they will pass around to each other a drink ˹of pure wine,˺ which leads to no idle talk or sinfulness.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “you ˹all˺ would not ˹even˺ matter to my lord were it not for your faith ˹in him˺. but now you ˹disbelievers˺ have denied ˹the truth˺, so the torment is bound to come.”
give full measure, and cause no loss ˹to others˺.
we will set up the scales of justice on the day of judgment, so no soul will be wronged in the least. and ˹even˺ if a deed is the weight of a mustard seed, we will bring it forth. and sufficient are we as a ˹vigilant˺ reckoner.
satan’s plan is to stir up hostility and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling and to prevent you from remembering allah and praying. will you not then abstain?
they demanded, “bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may witness ˹his trial˺.”
the day you see it, every nursing mother will abandon what she is nursing, and every pregnant woman will deliver her burden ˹prematurely˺. and you will see people ˹as if they were˺ drunk, though they will not be drunk; but the torment of allah is ˹terribly˺ severe.
moses prayed, “our lord! you have granted pharaoh and his chiefs luxuries and riches in this worldly life, ˹which they abused˺ to lead people astray from your way! our lord, destroy their riches and harden their hearts so that they will not believe until they see the painful punishment.”
satan has taken hold of them, causing them to forget the remembrance of allah. they are the party of satan. surely satan’s party is bound to lose.
˹but˺ surely to your lord is the return ˹of all˺.
and this drink’s flavour will come from tasnim—
indeed, the believers, jews, christians, and sabians
now, what is the matter with them that they are turning away from the reminder,
the jews say, “the christians have nothing to stand on” and the christians say, “the jews have nothing to stand on,” although both recite the scriptures. and those ˹pagans˺ who have no knowledge say the same ˹about people of faith˺. surely allah will judge between them on the day of judgment regarding their dispute.
except the one who originated me, and he will surely guide me.”
those who will be dragged into hell on their faces will be in the worst place, and are ˹now˺ farthest from the ˹right˺ way.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “that knowledge is with allah alone, and i am only sent with a clear warning.”
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter, we will increase their harvest. and whoever desires ˹only˺ the harvest of this world, we will give them some of it, but they will have no share in the hereafter.
you will see the wrongdoers fearful ˹of the punishment˺ for what they committed but it will be inevitable for them, whereas those who believe and do good will be in the lush gardens of paradise. they will have whatever they desire from their lord. that is ˹truly˺ the greatest bounty.
and ˹remember˺ when moses said to his people, “o my people! surely you have wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf, so turn in repentance to your creator and execute ˹the calf-worshippers among˺ yourselves. that is best for you in the sight of your creator.” then he accepted your repentance. surely he is the accepter of repentance, most merciful.
˹remember, o prophet,˺ when your lord revealed to the angels, “i am with you. so make the believers stand firm. i will cast horror into the hearts of the disbelievers. so strike their necks and strike their fingertips.”
then his lord chose him ˹for his grace˺, accepted his repentance, and guided him ˹rightly˺.
allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. and woe to the disbelievers because of a severe torment!
they said, “o our father! why do you not trust us with joseph, although we truly wish him well?
nothing keeps us from sending the ˹demanded˺ signs except that they had ˹already˺ been denied by earlier peoples. and we gave thamûd the she-camel as a clear sign, but they wrongfully rejected it. we only send the signs as a warning.
when they became oblivious to warnings, we showered them with everything they desired. but just as they became prideful of what they were given, we seized them by surprise, then they instantly fell into despair!
then an ˹overwhelming˺ earthquake struck them and they fell lifeless in their homes.
they had remained in their cave for three hundred years, adding nine.
˹so˺ compete with one another for forgiveness from your lord and a paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who believe in allah and his messengers. this is the favour of allah. he grants it to whoever he wills. and allah is the lord of infinite bounty.
wink to one another whenever they passed by,
even though they were not sent as keepers over the believers.
say ˹to them, o prophet˺, “even if you were to possess the ˹infinite˺ treasuries of my lord’s mercy, then you would certainly withhold ˹them˺, fearing they would run out—for humankind is ever stingy!”
the chiefs of pharaoh’s people said, “he is indeed a skilled magician,
and so we awakened them so that they might question one another. one of them exclaimed, “how long have you remained ˹asleep˺?” some replied, “perhaps a day, or part of a day.” they said ˹to one another˺, “your lord knows best how long you have remained. so send one of you with these silver coins of yours to the city, and let him find which food is the purest, and then bring you provisions from it. let him be ˹exceptionally˺ cautious, and do not let him give you away.
and that ˹the outcome of˺ their endeavours will be seen ˹in their record˺,
is this magic, or do you not see?
that is allah, your lord, the creator of all things. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. how can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺?
now put your hand through ˹the opening of˺ your collar, it will come out ˹shining˺ white, unblemished. these are two proofs from your lord to pharaoh and his chiefs. they have truly been a rebellious people.”
˹commanded to say:˺ ‘let the children of israel go with us.’’”
as such, allah will absolve them of ˹even˺ the worst of what they did and reward them according to the best of what they used to do.
warn with this ˹quran˺ those who are awed by the prospect of being gathered before their lord—when they will have no protector or intercessor besides him—so perhaps they will be mindful ˹of him˺.
his authority is only over those who take him as a patron and who—under his influence—associate ˹others˺ with allah ˹in worship˺.
it is not for allah to take a son! glory be to him. when he decrees a matter, he simply tells it, “be!” and it is!
they were about to intimidate you to drive you out of the land ˹of mecca˺, but then they would not have survived after you ˹had left˺ except for a little while.
in it are clear signs and the standing-place of abraham. whoever enters it should be safe. pilgrimage to this house is an obligation by allah upon whoever is able among the people. and whoever disbelieves, then surely allah is not in need of ˹any of his˺ creation.
o believers! ˹the law of˺ retaliation is set for you in cases of murder—a free man for a free man, a slave for a slave, and a female for a female. and payment should be made courteously. this is a concession and a mercy from your lord. but whoever transgresses after that will suffer a painful punishment.
then moses showed him the great sign,
but if they break their oaths after making a pledge and attack your faith, then fight the champions of disbelief—who never honour their oaths—so perhaps they will desist.
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “should we invoke, other than allah, those ˹idols˺ which cannot benefit or harm us, and turn back to disbelief after allah has guided us? ˹if we do so, we will be˺ like those disoriented by devils in the wilderness, while their companions call them to guidance, ˹saying˺, ‘come to us!’ say, ˹o prophet,˺ “allah’s guidance is the ˹only˺ true guidance. and we are commanded to submit to the lord of all worlds,
he said, “o my people! consider if i stand on a clear proof from my lord and he has blessed me with a mercy from himself, which you fail to see. should we ˹then˺ force it on you against your will?
we only sent messengers to be obeyed by allah’s will. if only those ˹hypocrites˺ came to you ˹o prophet˺—after wronging themselves—seeking allah’s forgiveness and the messenger prayed for their forgiveness, they would have certainly found allah ever accepting of repentance, most merciful.
touched by none except the purified ˹angels˺.
he prayed, “my lord! forgive me, and grant me an authority that will never be matched by anyone after me. you are indeed the giver ˹of all bounties˺.”
say to those who disbelieve, “persist in your ways; we will certainly persist in ours.
whoever allah wills to guide, he opens their heart to islam. but whoever he wills to leave astray, he makes their chest tight and constricted as if they were climbing up into the sky. this is how allah dooms those who disbelieve.
and provide for them from sources they could never imagine. and whoever puts their trust in allah, then he ˹alone˺ is sufficient for them. certainly allah achieves his will. allah has already set a destiny for everything.
if a woman fears indifference or neglect from her husband, there is no blame on either of them if they seek ˹fair˺ settlement, which is best. humans are ever inclined to selfishness. but if you are gracious and mindful ˹of allah˺, surely allah is all-aware of what you do.
we have indeed sent down revelations clarifying ˹the truth˺. but allah ˹only˺ guides whoever he wills to the straight path.
in the gardens of bliss.
˹this is˺ the promise of allah. ˹and˺ allah never fails in his promise. but most people do not know.
˹commitment to˺ pilgrimage is made in appointed months. whoever commits to ˹performing˺ pilgrimage, let them stay away from intimate relations, foul language, and arguments during pilgrimage. whatever good you do, allah ˹fully˺ knows of it. take ˹necessary˺ provisions ˹for the journey˺—surely the best provision is righteousness. and be mindful of me, o people of reason!
as for gains granted by allah to his messenger from the people of ˹other˺ lands, they are for allah and the messenger, his close relatives, orphans, the poor, and ˹needy˺ travellers so that wealth may not merely circulate among your rich. whatever the messenger gives you, take it. and whatever he forbids you from, leave it. and fear allah. surely allah is severe in punishment.
and our duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.”
we placed at their disposal ˹evil˺ associates who made their past and future ˹misdeeds˺ appealing to them. ˹so˺ the fate of earlier communities of jinn and humans has been justified against them ˹as well˺, ˹for˺ they were truly losers.
who seeks to drive you from your land by his magic. so what do you propose?”
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah. surely in the remembrance of allah do hearts find comfort.
so that allah will punish hypocrite men and women and polytheistic men and women, and allah will turn in mercy to believing men and women. for allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
˹jesus also declared,˺ “surely allah is my lord and your lord, so worship him ˹alone˺. this is the straight path.”
all it takes, when he wills something ˹to be˺, is simply to say to it: “be!” and it is!
solomon asked, “o chiefs! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in ˹full˺ submission?”
who they resented for no reason other than belief in allah—the almighty, the praiseworthy—
if you raise your hand to kill me, i will not raise mine to kill you, because i fear allah—the lord of all worlds.
but satan deceived them—leading to their fall from the ˹blissful˺ state they were in, you will find in the earth a residence and provision for your appointed stay.”
nor the ˹scorching˺ heat and the ˹cool˺ shade.
indeed, we have sent down the book to you ˹o prophet˺ in truth, so worship allah ˹alone˺, being sincerely devoted to him.
o children of adam! do not let satan deceive you as he tempted your parents out of paradise and caused their cover to be removed in order to expose their nakedness. surely he and his soldiers watch you from where you cannot see them. we have made the devils allies of those who disbelieve.
so turn away from them ˹o prophet˺. ˹and wait for˺ the day ˹when˺ the caller
yet they have taken besides him gods who cannot create anything but are themselves created. nor can they protect or benefit themselves. nor can they control life, death, or resurrection.
“allah has children.” they are simply liars.
who will be visited by a humiliating torment ˹in this life˺ and overwhelmed by an everlasting punishment ˹in the next˺.”
and we gave moses the scripture and made it a guide for the children of israel, ˹stating:˺ “do not take besides me any other trustee of affairs,
they have made their ˹false˺ oaths as a shield, hindering ˹others˺ from the way of allah. evil indeed is what they do!
but no! ˹they only say this˺ because the truth they used to hide will become all too clear to them. even if they were to be sent back, they would certainly revert to what they were forbidden. indeed they are liars!
had it not been for the grace of my lord, i ˹too˺ would have certainly been among those brought ˹to hell˺.”
moses responded: “˹he is˺ the lord of the east and west, and everything in between, if only you had any sense.”
indeed, the punishment of your lord will come to pass—
in fact, they ˹hastily˺ rejected the book without comprehending it and before the fulfilment of its warnings. similarly, those before them were in denial. see then what was the end of the wrongdoers!
she appealed, “i truly seek refuge in the most compassionate from you! ˹so leave me alone˺ if you are god-fearing.”
allah responded, “we have indeed tested your people in your absence, and the samiri has led them astray.”
is it you who produce its trees, or is it we who do so?
so we will certainly make the disbelievers taste a severe punishment, and we will surely repay them according to the worst of their deeds.
but they ˹just˺ say what their predecessors said.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o people of the book! let us come to common terms: that we will worship none but allah, associate none with him, nor take one another as lords instead of allah.” but if they turn away, then say, “bear witness that we have submitted ˹to allah alone˺.”
there they will never hear any idle or sinful talk—
surely those who offend allah are condemned by allah in this world and the hereafter. and he has prepared for them a humiliating punishment.
am i not better than this nobody who can hardly express himself?
if you ˹meccans˺ sought judgment, now it has come to you. and if you cease, it will be for your own good. but if you persist, we will persist. and your forces—no matter how numerous they might be—will not benefit you whatsoever. for allah is certainly with the believers.
“my lord! grant me wisdom, and join me with the righteous.
i surely knew i would face my reckoning.”
he is the one who created you from clay, then appointed a term ˹for your death˺ and another known only to him ˹for your resurrection˺—yet you continue to doubt!
and ˹remember˺ when abraham said to his people, “worship allah, and fear him. this is better for you, if only you knew.
leaving no thought for allah’s will.
then look again and again—your sight will return frustrated and weary.
they will have no food except a foul, thorny shrub,
instructing: “make full-length armour, ˹perfectly˺ balancing the links. and work righteousness ˹o family of david!˺. indeed, i am all-seeing of what you do.”
then the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds overtook them, and they were overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule.
˹remember˺ when abraham prayed, “my lord! make this city ˹of mecca˺ secure, and keep me and my children away from the worship of idols.
so he smashed them into pieces, except the biggest of them, so they might turn to it ˹for answers˺.
do not be arrogant with me, but come to me, fully submitting ˹to allah˺.’”
it is they who will receive a ˹heavenly˺ reward for the good they have done. surely allah is swift in reckoning.
kill joseph or cast him out to some ˹distant˺ land so that our father’s attention will be only ours, then after that you may ˹repent and˺ become righteous people!”
adding, “our lord! whoever brought this upon us, double their punishment in the fire.”
the life of this world has been made appealing to the disbelievers, and they mock the believers. those who are mindful ˹of allah˺ will rank above them on the day of judgment. and allah provides for whoever he wills without limit.
but on that day the believers will be laughing at the disbelievers,
only those ˹destined to be˺ deluded are turned away from it.
˹they are˺ those who pray, “our lord! bless us with ˹pious˺ spouses and offspring who will be the joy of our hearts, and make us models for the righteous.”
this is because allah would never discontinue his favour to a people until they discontinue their faith. surely allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
to firmly establish the truth and wipe out falsehood—even to the dismay of the wicked.
˹but˺ those ˹objects of worship˺ they invoke besides him have no power to intercede, except those who testify to the truth knowingly.
o believers! be mindful of allah, and say what is right.
for they are strictly barred from ˹even˺ overhearing ˹it˺.
˹consider˺ the day ˹when˺ the quaking blast will come to pass,
and the people of the left—how ˹miserable˺ will they be!
blame is only on those who wrong people and transgress in the land unjustly. it is they who will suffer a painful punishment.
this is indeed our provision that will never end.
their fate is that of the people of pharaoh and those before them—they all disbelieved in allah’s signs, so allah seized them for their sins. indeed, allah is all-powerful, severe in punishment.
if a blessing befalls you ˹o prophet˺, they grieve, but if a disaster befalls you, they say, “we took our precaution in advance,” and turn away, rejoicing.
still they have labelled the angels, who are servants of the most compassionate, as female. did they witness their creation? their statement will be recorded, and they will be questioned!
˹remember, o prophet˺ when your lord said to the angels, “i am going to create a human being from clay.
it is as if the lightning were about to snatch away their sight. whenever lightning strikes, they walk in its light, but when darkness covers them, they stand still. had allah willed, he could have taken away their hearing and sight. surely allah is most capable of everything.
so do not think ˹o prophet˺ that allah will fail to keep his promise to his messengers. allah is indeed almighty, capable of punishment.
among us are those who are righteous and those who are less so. we have been of different factions.
so turn away ˹o prophet˺ from whoever has shunned our reminder, only seeking the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world.
and surely most of the earlier generations had strayed before them,
indeed, we gave the children of israel the scripture, wisdom, and prophethood; granted them good, lawful provisions; and favoured them above the others.
to him belongs ˹all˺ majesty in the heavens and the earth. and he is the almighty, all-wise.
and delivered moses and those with him all together.
and those ˹humans˺ thought, just like you ˹jinn˺, that allah would not resurrect anyone ˹for judgment˺.
yet are unmindful of their prayers;
on that day ˹some˺ faces will be downcast,
indeed, those who hide allah’s revelations, trading them for a fleeting gain consume nothing but fire into their bellies. allah will neither speak to them on the day of judgment, nor will he purify them. and they will suffer a painful punishment.
it is allah who sends the winds, which then stir up ˹vapour, forming˺ clouds, which he then spreads out in the sky or piles up into masses as he wills, from which you see rain come forth. then as soon as he causes it to fall on whoever he wills of his servants, they rejoice,
jacob insisted, “i will not send him with you until you give me a solemn oath by allah that you will certainly bring him back to me, unless you are totally overpowered.” then after they had given him their oaths, he concluded, “allah is a witness to what we have said.”
˹and say,˺ “i had no knowledge of the highest assembly ˹in heaven˺ when they differed ˹concerning adam˺.
distressed when touched with evil,
moreover, establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey the messenger, so you may be shown mercy.
if the disbelievers were to fight you, they would certainly flee. then they would never find any protector or helper.
so how will it be when we bring a witness from every faith-community and bring you ˹o prophet˺ as a witness against yours?
then frowned and scowled,
it is the same ˹to him˺ whether any of you speaks secretly or openly, whether one hides in the darkness of night or goes about in broad daylight.
and deny the day of judgment,
then he ˹stealthily˺ advanced towards their gods, and said ˹mockingly˺, “will you not eat ˹your offerings˺?
or ˹ask them,˺ “who guides you in the darkness of the land and sea, is it another god besides allah? exalted is allah above what they associate ˹with him˺!
but whoever comes to him as a believer, having done good, they will have the highest ranks:
they swear by allah their most solemn oaths that if a sign were to come to them, they would certainly believe in it. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “signs are only with allah.” what will make you ˹believers˺ realize that even if a sign were to come to them, they still would not believe?
indeed, allah does not wrong people in the least, but it is people who wrong themselves.
nor did we feed the poor.
˹they are˺ those who spend neither wastefully nor stingily, but moderately in between.
and those who believe and do good will be the residents of paradise. they will be there forever.
allah! there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him, the ever-living, all-sustaining. neither drowsiness nor sleep overtakes him. to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. who could possibly intercede with him without his permission? he ˹fully˺ knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them, but no one can grasp any of his knowledge—except what he wills ˹to reveal˺. his seat
and there were in the city nine ˹elite˺ men who spread corruption in the land, never doing what is right.
or that he will not destroy them gradually? but your lord is truly ever gracious, most merciful.
and ˹then˺ their feet are tied together ˹in a shroud˺.
˹it is˺ the day the trumpet will be blown, and you will ˹all˺ come forth in crowds.
here you are! you disputed about what you have ˹little˺ knowledge of, allah knows and you do not know.
unless allah wills otherwise. he surely knows what is open and what is hidden.
what is left ˹as a lawful gain˺ by allah is far better for you if you are ˹truly˺ believers. and i am not a keeper over you.”
the gardens of eternity, whose gates will be open for them.
indeed, iblis’ assumption about them has come true, so they ˹all˺ follow him, except a group of ˹true˺ believers.
moses then asked, “what did you think you were doing, o samiri?”
that is allah—your true lord. so what is beyond the truth except falsehood? how can you then be turned away?”
and whoever of you devoutly obeys allah and his messenger and does good, we will grant her double the reward, and we have prepared for her an honourable provision.
you did not ˹bother to˺ hide yourselves from your ears, eyes, and skin to prevent them from testifying against you. rather, you assumed that allah did not know much of what you used to do.
so be patient with your lord’s decree, and do not be like ˹jonah,˺ the man of the whale, who cried out ˹to allah˺, in total distress.
with allah?” they will cry, “they have ˹all˺ failed us. in fact, we did not invoke anything ˹real˺ before.” this is how allah leaves the disbelievers to stray.
there is a sign for them in the dead earth: we give it life, producing grain from it for them to eat.
but his people’s only response was to say, “expel them from your land! they are a people who wish to remain chaste!”
so we made their fate an example to present and future generations, and a lesson to the god-fearing.
and those conducting affairs ˹obediently˺!
and ˹remember˺ when your lord proclaimed, ‘if you are grateful, i will certainly give you more. but if you are ungrateful, surely my punishment is severe.’”
i wish death was the end!
if only you had said upon hearing it, “how can we speak about such a thing! glory be to you ˹o lord˺! this is a heinous slander!”
these are the parables we set forth for humanity, but none will understand them except the people of knowledge.
while you are looking on?
then we will deliver those who were devout, leaving the wrongdoers there on their knees.
they all transgressed throughout the land,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o you disbelievers!
loving and of equal age,
o children of adam! we have provided for you clothing to cover your nakedness and as an adornment. however, the best clothing is righteousness. this is one of allah’s bounties, so perhaps you will be mindful.
but allah knows best whatever they hide.
and he has granted you all that you asked him for. if you tried to count allah’s blessings, you would never be able to number them. indeed humankind is truly unfair, ˹totally˺ ungrateful.
of replacing them with ˹others˺ better than them, and we cannot be prevented ˹from doing so˺.
upon moses’ return to his people, ˹totally˺ furious and sorrowful, he said, “what an evil thing you committed in my absence! did you want to hasten your lord’s torment?” then he threw down the tablets and grabbed his brother by the hair, dragging him closer. aaron pleaded, “o son of my mother! the people overpowered me and were about to kill me. so do not ˹humiliate me and˺ make my enemies rejoice, nor count me among the wrongdoing people.”
we also showed abraham the wonders of the heavens and the earth, so he would be sure in faith.
i will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, then crucify you all.”
he asked, “do you remember what you did to joseph and his brother in your ignorance?”
that pelted them with stones of baked clay,
so taste ˹the punishment˺ for neglecting the meeting of this day of yours. we ˹too˺ will certainly neglect you. and taste the torment of eternity for what you used to do!
still they defied him and slaughtered her. so their lord crushed them for their crime, levelling all to the ground.
˹he is˺ lord of the two easts and the two wests.
and will burn in the blazing fire.
when the most wicked of them was roused ˹to kill the she-camel˺.
then which of your lord’s favours will you ˹humans and jinn˺ both deny?
o humanity! a lesson is set forth, so listen to it ˹carefully˺: those ˹idols˺ you invoke besides allah can never create ˹so much as˺ a fly, even if they ˹all˺ were to come together for that. and if a fly were to snatch anything away from them, they cannot ˹even˺ retrieve it from the fly. how powerless are those who invoke and those invoked!
but the wrongdoers among them changed the words they were commanded to say. so we sent down a punishment from the heavens upon them for their wrongdoing.
then when they entered as their father had instructed them, this did not help them against ˹the will of˺ allah whatsoever. it was just a desire in jacob’s heart which he satisfied. he was truly blessed with ˹great˺ knowledge because of what we had taught him, but most people have no knowledge.
o messenger! do not grieve for those who race to disbelieve—those who say, “we believe” with their tongues, but their hearts are in disbelief. nor those among the jews who eagerly listen to lies, attentive to those who are too arrogant to come to you. they distort the scripture, taking rulings out of context, then say, “if this is the ruling you get ˹from muhammad˺, accept it. if not, beware!” whoever allah allows to be deluded, you can never be of any help to them against allah. it is not allah’s will to purify their hearts. for them is disgrace in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment in the hereafter.
we surely destroyed ˹other˺ peoples before you when they did wrong, and their messengers came to them with clear proofs but they would not believe! this is how we reward the wicked people.
the example of the disbelievers ˹not responding to the messenger’s warning˺ is like a flock not comprehending the calls and cries of the shepherd. ˹they are wilfully˺ deaf, dumb and blind so they have no understanding.
and the moon is dimmed,
if allah were to hasten evil for people as they wish to hasten good, they would have certainly been doomed. but we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander blindly in their defiance.
for whoever obeys allah and his messenger, and fears allah and is mindful of him, then it is they who will ˹truly˺ triumph.
allah responded, “certainly not! so go, both of you, with our signs. we will be with you, listening.
neither their meat nor blood reaches allah. rather, it is your piety that reaches him. this is how he has subjected them to you so that you may proclaim the greatness of allah for what he has guided you to, and give good news to the good-doers.
˹who will be˺ a multitude from earlier generations
˹they are˺ those who establish prayer and donate from what we have provided for them.
we will show them our signs in the universe and within themselves until it becomes clear to them that this ˹quran˺ is the truth. is it not enough that your lord is a witness over all things?
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “who is the lord of the heavens and the earth?” say, “allah!” ask ˹them˺, “why ˹then˺ have you taken besides him lords who cannot even benefit or protect themselves?” say, “can the blind and the sighted be equal? or can darkness and light be equal?” or have they associated with allah partners who ˹supposedly˺ produced a creation like his, leaving them confused between the two creations? say, “allah is the creator of all things, and he is the one, the supreme.”
then when you and those with you have settled in the ark, say, “all praise is for allah, who saved us from the wrongdoing people.”
say, “the truth has come, and falsehood will vanish, never to return.”
and we will certainly reduce whatever is on it to barren ground.
in fact, to allah ˹alone˺ belongs this world and the next.
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “consider if this ˹quran˺ is ˹truly˺ from allah and you deny it, and a witness from the children of israel attests to it and then believes, whereas you act arrogantly. surely allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.”
these are the ones who trade the hereafter for the life of this world. so their punishment will not be reduced, nor will they be helped.
if all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean ˹were ink˺, refilled by seven other oceans, the words of allah would not be exhausted. surely allah is almighty, all-wise.
had those idols been ˹true˺ gods, they would not have entered it. and they will be there forever.
this is because the disbelievers follow falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their lord. this is how allah shows people their true state ˹of faith˺.
later, his people came rushing towards him ˹furiously˺.
as a blessing from us. this is how we reward whoever gives thanks.
˹at least˺ for ˹the favour of˺ making quraysh habitually secure—
he said ˹to his people˺, “you have taken idols ˹for worship˺ instead of allah, only to keep ˹the bond of˺ harmony among yourselves in this worldly life. but on the day of judgment you will disown and curse one another. your home will be the fire, and you will have no helper!”
say, “travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers.”
who spread corruption throughout the land, never setting things right.”
but the messenger and the believers with him strived with their wealth and their lives. they will have all the best, and it is they who will be successful.
so call upon allah with sincere devotion, even to the dismay of the disbelievers.
with cups, pitchers, and a drink ˹of pure wine˺ from a flowing stream,
whenever a sûrah is revealed, they look at one another, ˹saying,˺ “is anyone watching you?” then they slip away. ˹it is˺ allah ˹who˺ has turned their hearts away because they are a people who do not comprehend.
except your chosen servants among them.”
˹remember˺ when your sister came along and proposed, ‘shall i direct you to someone who will nurse him?’ so we reunited you with your mother so that her heart would be put at ease, and she would not grieve. ˹later˺ you killed a man ˹by mistake˺, but we saved you from sorrow, as well as other tests we put you through. then you stayed for a number of years among the people of midian. then you came here as pre-destined, o moses!
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. and he is the most high, the greatest.
this worldly life is no more than play and amusement, but far better is the ˹eternal˺ home of the hereafter for those mindful ˹of allah˺. will you not then understand?
they will cry, “our lord! our ill-fate took hold of us, so we became a misguided people.
and he is the one who causes the day and the night to alternate, ˹as a sign˺ for whoever desires to be mindful or to be grateful.
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “he is the one who brought you into being and gave you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹yet˺ you hardly give any thanks.”
as for those who believe and do good, we will certainly absolve them of their sins, and reward them according to the best of what they used to do.
your god is ˹only˺ one god. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him—the most compassionate, most merciful.
indeed, noah cried out to us, and how excellent are we in responding!
should we then treat those who have submitted like the wicked?
now, whoever disputes with you ˹o prophet˺ concerning jesus after full knowledge has come to you, say, “come! let us gather our children and your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves—then let us sincerely invoke allah’s curse upon the liars.”
now we have none to intercede for us,
o children of israel! remember ˹all˺ the favours i granted you and how i honoured you above the others.
it has been decreed for such devils that whoever takes them as a guide will be misguided and led by them into the torment of the blaze.
˹remember, o prophet,˺ when you left your home in the early morning to position the believers in the battlefield. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against allah or deny his revelations? they will receive what is destined for them, until our messenger-angels arrive to take their souls, asking them, “where are those ˹false gods˺ you used to invoke besides allah?” they will cry, “they have failed us,” and they will confess against themselves that they were indeed disbelievers.
and lot was indeed one of the messengers.
had it been allah’s will to have offspring, he could have chosen whatever he willed of his creation. glory be to him! he is allah—the one, the supreme.
and tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their chastity, and not to reveal their adornments except to their husbands, their fathers, their fathers-in-law, their sons, their stepsons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons or sisters’ sons, their fellow women, those ˹bondwomen˺ in their possession, male attendants with no desire, or children who are still unaware of women’s nakedness. let them not stomp their feet, drawing attention to their hidden adornments. turn to allah in repentance all together, o believers, so that you may be successful.
so we delivered him and his family, except his wife. we had destined her to be one of the doomed.
surely allah does not forgive associating ˹others˺ with him ˹in worship˺, but forgives anything else of whoever he wills. indeed, whoever associates ˹others˺ with allah has clearly gone far astray.
but when the truth came to them from us, they said, “if only he was given the like of what moses had been given.” adding, “we truly deny both.”
who does more wrong than the one who fabricates lies against allah or claims, “i have received revelations!”—although nothing was revealed to them—or the one who says, “i can reveal the like of allah’s revelations!”? if you ˹o prophet˺ could only see the wrongdoers in the throes of death while the angels are stretching out their hands ˹saying˺, “give up your souls! today you will be rewarded with the torment of disgrace for telling lies about allah and for being arrogant towards his revelations!”
can those to whom we have made a fine promise—which they will see fulfilled—be like those who we have allowed to enjoy the pleasures of this worldly life, but on the day of judgment will be brought ˹for punishment˺?
o assembly of jinn and humans! if you can penetrate beyond the realms of the heavens and the earth, then do so. ˹but˺ you cannot do that without ˹our˺ authority.
if we ever abrogate a verse or cause it to be forgotten, we replace it with a better or similar one. do you not know that allah is most capable of everything?
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o allah! lord over all authorities! you give authority to whoever you please and remove it from who you please; you honour whoever you please and disgrace who you please—all good is in your hands. surely you ˹alone˺ are most capable of everything.
indeed, we sent noah to his people. he said, “o my people! worship allah—you have no other god except him. i truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous day.”
you were inattentive to him.
he is no more than a man who has fabricated a lie about allah, and we will never believe in him.”
and grain with husks, and aromatic plants.
˹consider˺ the day we will gather them all together then ask those who associated others ˹with allah in worship˺, “where are those gods you used to claim?”
you will surely find them clinging to life more eagerly than any other people, even more than polytheists. each one of them wishes to live a thousand years. but even if they were to live that long, it would not save them from the punishment. and allah is all-seeing of what they do.
but if they cease, then surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
then they turned on each other, throwing blame.
he urged ˹the disbelieving group˺, “o my people! why do you ˹seek to˺ hasten the torment if only you sought allah’s forgiveness so you may be shown mercy!”
he said, “have you come to drive us out of our land with your magic, o moses?
surely this ˹quran˺ is a glory for you and your people. and you will ˹all˺ be questioned ˹about it˺.
we used to take up positions there for eavesdropping, but whoever dares eavesdrop now will find a flare lying in wait for them.
we divided them into twelve tribes—each as a community. and we revealed to moses, when his people asked for water, “strike the rock with your staff.” then twelve springs gushed out. each tribe knew its drinking place. we shaded them with clouds and sent down to them manna and quails, ˹saying˺, “eat from the good things we have provided for you.” they ˹certainly˺ did not wrong us, but wronged themselves.
so pharaoh wanted to scare the israelites out of the land ˹of egypt˺, but we drowned him and all of those with him.
he created humans from a sperm-drop, then—behold!—they openly challenge ˹him˺.
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and all living beings he dispersed throughout both. and he is most capable of bringing all together whenever he wills.
˹and sent˺ a messenger reciting to you allah’s revelations, making things clear so that he may bring those who believe and do good out of darkness and into light. and whoever believes in allah and does good will be admitted by him into gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. allah will have indeed granted them an excellent provision.
they replied, “let him and his brother wait and dispatch mobilizers to all cities
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i have been forbidden to worship those you invoke besides allah.” say, “i will not follow your desires, for i then would certainly be astray and not one of those ˹rightly˺ guided.”
and hell is brought forth on that day—this is when every ˹disbelieving˺ person will remember ˹their own sins˺. but what is the use of remembering then?
you may benefit from sacrificial animals for an appointed term, then their place of sacrifice is at the ancient house.
we trust our lord will give us a better garden than this, ˹for˺ we are indeed turning to our lord with hope.”
o people of the book! now our messenger has come to you, revealing much of what you have hidden of the scriptures and disregarding much. there certainly has come to you from allah a light and a clear book
had we revealed it to a non-arab,
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the re-creation of humankind, but most people do not know.
so they rejected him, and ˹so˺ were overtaken by the torment of the day of the ˹deadly˺ cloud. that was really a torment of a tremendous day.
say, “it is not in my power to harm or benefit you.”
and ˹remember˺ when david and solomon passed judgment regarding the crops ruined ˹at night˺ by someone’s sheep, and we were witness to their judgments.
it is not for the polytheists to maintain the mosques of allah while they openly profess disbelief. their deeds are void, and they will be in the fire forever.
indeed, we have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you, just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh.
this is how we relate to you ˹o prophet˺ some of the stories of the past. and we have certainly granted you a reminder from us.
˹he will do that˺ to make clear to them what they disagreed on, and for the disbelievers to know that they were liars.
so they both ate from the tree and then their nakedness was exposed to them, prompting them to cover themselves with leaves from paradise. so adam disobeyed his lord, and ˹so˺ lost his way.
unmatched in any other land;
and when he reached full strength and maturity, we gave him wisdom and knowledge. this is how we reward the good-doers.
and as for those given their record in their left hand, they will cry ˹bitterly˺, “i wish i had not been given my record,
and incite whoever you can of them with your voice, mobilize against them all your cavalry and infantry, manipulate them in their wealth and children, and make them promises.” but satan promises them nothing but delusion.
they ask you ˹o prophet˺ about the spirit. say, “its nature is known only to my lord, and you ˹o humanity˺ have been given but little knowledge.”
if you retaliate, then let it be equivalent to what you have suffered. but if you patiently endure, it is certainly best for those who are patient.
o prophet! motivate the believers to fight. if there are twenty steadfast among you, they will overcome two hundred. and if there are one hundred of you, they will overcome one thousand of the disbelievers, for they are a people who do not comprehend.
i want to let you bear your sin against me along with your other sins, then you will be one of those destined to the fire. and that is the reward of the wrongdoers.”
to the beggar and the poor;
and allah sets forth the example of a society which was safe and at ease, receiving its provision in abundance from all directions. but its people met allah’s favours with ingratitude, so allah made them taste the clutches of hunger and fear for their misdeeds.
put your trust in the ever-living, who never dies, and glorify his praises. sufficient is he as all-aware of the sins of his servants.
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit ˹to his will˺.”
˹allah will say to the angels,˺ “gather ˹all˺ the wrongdoers along with their peers, and whatever they used to worship
˹this is˺ a revelation from the almighty, most merciful,
or do they say, “he has fabricated this ˹quran˺!”? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “if i have done so, then i bear the burden of that sin! but i am free from your sinful accusation.”
the messiah would never be too proud to be a servant of allah, nor would the angels nearest to allah. those who are too proud and arrogant to worship him will be brought before him all together.
and who could be more astray than those who call upon others besides allah—˹others˺ that cannot respond to them until the day of judgment, and are ˹even˺ unaware of their calls?
indeed, the penalty for those who wage war against allah and his messenger and spread mischief in the land is death, crucifixion, cutting off their hands and feet on opposite sides, or exile from the land. this ˹penalty˺ is a disgrace for them in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment in the hereafter.
on the day he will gather them, it will be as if they had not stayed ˹in the world˺ except for an hour of a day, ˹as though they were only˺ getting to know one another. lost indeed will be those who denied the meeting with allah, and were not ˹rightly˺ guided!
he is the first and the last, the most high and most near, and he has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
blessed is the one who sent down the standard
as i distance myself from ˹all of˺ you and from whatever you invoke besides allah, i will ˹continue to˺ call upon my lord ˹alone˺, trusting that i will never be disappointed in invoking my lord.”
and why should i not worship the one who has originated me, and to whom you will be returned.
do they not know that allah is aware of what they conceal and what they reveal?
and the night when it falls still!
when his lord ordered him, “submit ˹to my will˺,” he responded, “i submit to the lord of all worlds.”
˹they will be told,˺ “taste your torment! this is what you sought to hasten.”
when you see them, their appearance impresses you. and when they speak, you listen to their ˹impressive˺ speech. but they are ˹just˺ like ˹worthless˺ planks of wood leaned ˹against a wall˺. they think every cry is against them. they are the enemy, so beware of them. may allah condemn them! how can they be deluded ˹from the truth˺?
forbidden to you are carrion, blood, and swine; what is slaughtered in the name of any other than allah; what is killed by strangling, beating, a fall, or by being gored to death; what is partly eaten by a predator unless you slaughter it; and what is sacrificed on altars. you are also forbidden to draw lots for decisions. this is all evil. today the disbelievers have given up all hope of ˹undermining˺ your faith. so do not fear them; fear me! today i have perfected your faith for you, completed my favour upon you, and chosen islam as your way. but whoever is compelled by extreme hunger—not intending to sin—then surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
˹are they better˺ or those who worship ˹their lord˺ devoutly in the hours of the night, prostrating and standing, fearing the hereafter and hoping for the mercy of their lord? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “are those who know equal to those who do not know?” none will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason.
or do they have a god other than allah? glorified is allah far above what they associate ˹with him˺!
you ˹o prophet˺ have no say in the matter. it is up to allah to turn to them in mercy or punish them, for indeed they are wrongdoers.
and do not ever touch her with harm, or you will be overtaken by the torment of a tremendous day.”
the lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith.
they asked ˹sarcastically˺, “o shu’aib! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our forefathers worshipped or give up managing our wealth as we please? indeed, you are such a tolerant, sensible man!”
abraham asked, “can they hear you when you call upon them?
so if they fail to respond to you, then know that they only follow their desires. and who could be more astray than those who follow their desires with no guidance from allah? surely allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
so, know ˹well, o prophet,˺ that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except allah. and seek forgiveness for your shortcomings and for ˹the sins of˺ the believing men and women. for allah ˹fully˺ knows your movements and places of rest ˹o people˺.
˹they are˺ those who honour allah’s covenant, never breaking the pledge;
on that night every matter of wisdom is ordained
˹imagine˺ how many societies of wrongdoers we have destroyed, raising up other people after them!
fight against them ˹if they persecute you˺ until there is no more persecution, and ˹your˺ devotion will be to allah ˹alone˺. if they stop ˹persecuting you˺, let there be no hostility except against the aggressors.
and this ˹quran˺ is not the word of an outcast devil.
indeed, those ˹believers˺ who fled on the day when the two armies met were made to slip by satan because of their misdeeds. but allah has pardoned them. surely allah is all-forgiving, most forbearing.
it is allah who made the earth a place of settlement for you and the sky a canopy. he shaped you ˹in the womb˺, perfecting your form. and he has provided you with what is good and lawful. that is allah—your lord. so blessed is allah, lord of all worlds.
and donate from what we have provided for you before death comes to one of you, and you cry, “my lord! if only you delayed me for a short while, i would give in charity and be one of the righteous.”
those who spend their wealth in charity day and night, secretly and openly—their reward is with their lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
the earth will shine with the light of its lord, the record ˹of deeds˺ will be laid ˹open˺, the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward—and judgment will be passed on all with fairness. none will be wronged.
staying there forever. what an excellent place to settle and reside!
he added, “shall i seek for you a god other than allah, while he has honoured you above the others?”
if only the disbelievers knew that a time will come when they will not be able to keep the fire off their faces or backs, nor will they be helped.
indeed, allah showers his blessings upon the prophet, and his angels pray for him. o believers! invoke allah’s blessings upon him, and salute him with worthy greetings of peace.
they ask, “why has no ˹other˺ sign been sent down to him from his lord?” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹the knowledge of˺ the unseen is with allah alone. so wait! i too am waiting with you.”
in fact, they say, “we found our forefathers following a ˹particular˺ way, and we are following in their footsteps.”
and do not be arrogant with allah. i have certainly come to you with a compelling proof.
so let them laugh a little—they will weep much as a reward for what they have committed.
and we surely inspired moses, ˹saying,˺ “leave with my servants ˹at night˺ and strike a dry passage for them across the sea. have no fear of being overtaken, nor be concerned ˹of drowning˺.”
whenever they commit a shameful deed, they say, “we found our forefathers doing it and allah has commanded us to do it.” say, “no! allah never commands what is shameful. how can you attribute to allah what you do not know?”
˹watch for˺ the day when every soul will be presented with whatever good it has done. and it will wish that its misdeeds were far off. and allah warns you about himself. and allah is ever gracious to ˹his˺ servants.
is allah not sufficient for his servant? yet they threaten you with other ˹powerless˺ gods besides him! whoever allah leaves to stray will be left with no guide.
they wish you would disbelieve as they have disbelieved, so you may all be alike. so do not take them as allies unless they emigrate in the cause of allah. but if they turn away, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them, and do not take any of them as allies or helpers,
burn in it! it is the same whether you endure ˹it˺ patiently or not. you are only rewarded for what you used to do.”
indeed, worship in the night is more impactful and suitable for recitation.
indeed, we granted david a ˹great˺ privilege from us, ˹commanding:˺ “o mountains! echo his hymns! and the birds as well.” we made iron mouldable for him,
and it will be said, “is there any healer ˹who can save this life˺?”
you will surely find the most bitter towards the believers to be the jews and polytheists and the most gracious to be those who call themselves christian. that is because there are priests and monks among them and because they are not arrogant.
then placed each ˹human˺ as a sperm-drop in a secure place,
then they returned to their father in the evening, weeping.
this is the book! there is no doubt about it
indeed, on that day the residents of paradise will be busy enjoying themselves.
they exclaimed, “which is better: our gods or jesus?” they cite him only to argue. in fact, they are a people prone to dispute.
indeed, the worst of all beings in the sight of allah are those who persist in disbelief, never to have faith—
this is because they believed and then abandoned faith. therefore, their hearts have been sealed, so they do not comprehend.
o my people! give full measure and weigh with justice. do not defraud people of their property, nor go about spreading corruption in the land.
whoever seeks honour and power, then ˹let them know that˺ all honour and power belongs to allah. to him ˹alone˺ good words ascend, and righteous deeds are raised up by him. as for those who plot evil, they will suffer a severe punishment. and the plotting of such ˹people˺ is doomed ˹to fail˺.
of how my lord has forgiven me, and made me one of the honourable.”
and ‘do not invoke, instead of allah, what can neither benefit nor harm you—for if you do, then you will certainly be one of the wrongdoers,’
is it the judgment of ˹pre-islamic˺ ignorance they seek? who could be a better judge than allah for people of sure faith?
o prophet! struggle against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm with them. hell will be their home. what an evil destination!
moreover, he is the one who brings about joy and sadness.
˹watch for˺ the day ˹when˺ the earth will be changed into a different earth and the heavens as well, and all will appear before allah—the one, the supreme.
he responded, “i am only a messenger from your lord, ˹sent˺ to bless you with a pure son.”
o believers! take your precautions and go forth either in groups or together.
when you return, they will swear to you by allah so that you may leave them alone. so leave them alone—they are truly evil. hell will be their home as a reward for what they have committed.
it will be said to them, “enter the gates of hell, to stay there forever.” what an evil home for the arrogant!
but as soon as he rescues them, they transgress in the land unjustly. o humanity! your transgression is only against your own souls. ˹there is only˺ brief enjoyment in this worldly life, then to us is your return, and then we will inform you of what you used to do.
reclining face to face.
whatever new reminder comes to them from the most compassionate, they always turn away from it.
he knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes out of it, and whatever descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it. and he is the most merciful, all-forgiving.
our lord! you will certainly gather all humanity for the ˹promised˺ day—about which there is no doubt. surely allah does not break his promise.”
o my people! who would protect me from allah if i were to dismiss them? will you not then be mindful?
and expose the hypocrites. when it was said to them, “come fight in the cause of allah or ˹at least˺ defend yourselves,” they replied, “if we had known there was fighting, we would have definitely gone with you.” they were closer to disbelief than to belief on that day—for saying with their mouths what was not in their hearts. allah is all-knowing of what they hide.
they did not split ˹into sects˺ out of mutual envy until knowledge came to them. after them are truly in alarming doubt about this ˹quran˺.
then when the boy reached the age to work with him, abraham said, “o my dear son! i have seen in a dream that i ˹must˺ sacrifice you. so tell me what you think.” he replied, “o my dear father! do as you are commanded. allah willing, you will find me steadfast.”
but the disbelieving chiefs of his people said ˹to the masses˺, “this is only a human like you, who wants to be superior to you. had allah willed, he could have easily sent down angels ˹instead˺. we have never heard of this in ˹the history of˺ our forefathers.
we certainly gave moses the book and appointed his brother aaron as his helper.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. he forgives whoever he wills, and punishes whoever he wills. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them from saying what is sinful and consuming what is unlawful? evil indeed is their inaction!
indeed, we sent it down on a blessed night, for we always warn ˹against evil˺.
˹still˺ there are some who dispute about allah without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening scripture,
why did they not humble themselves when we made them suffer? instead, their hearts were hardened, and satan made their misdeeds appealing to them.
˹he is the one˺ who has laid out the earth for ˹all of˺ you, and set in it pathways for you, and sends down rain from the sky, causing various types of plants to grow,
surely this ˹quran˺ is sufficient ˹as a reminder˺ for those devoted to worship.
and there is certainly a lesson for you in cattle: we give you to drink of what is in their bellies, from between digested food and blood: pure milk, pleasant to drink.
when they meet the believers they say, “we believe.” but in private they say ˹to each other˺, “will you disclose to the believers the knowledge allah has revealed to you, so that they may use it against you before your lord? do you not understand?”
˹say, o prophet,˺ “should i seek a judge other than allah while he is the one who has revealed for you the book ˹with the truth˺ perfectly explained?” those who were given the scripture know that it has been revealed ˹to you˺ from your lord in truth. so do not be one of those who doubt.
we will surely question those who received messengers and we will question the messengers ˹themselves˺.
it is he who is ˹the only˺ god in the heavens and ˹the only˺ god on the earth. for he is the all-wise, all-knowing.
˹remember˺ when allah made a covenant with the prophets, ˹saying,˺ “now that i have given you the book and wisdom, if there comes to you a messenger confirming what you have, you must believe in him and support him.” he added, “do you affirm this covenant and accept this commitment?” they said, “yes, we do.” allah said, “then bear witness, and i too am a witness.”
enter paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.”
˹it is only˺ a brief enjoyment, then they will suffer a painful punishment.
blessed is the name of your lord, full of majesty and honour.
so he cried out to his lord, “i am helpless, so help ˹me˺!”
˹the believers will be asked,˺ “have the disbelievers ˹not˺ been paid back for what they used to do?”
˹consider˺ the day allah will gather the messengers and say, “what response did you receive?” they will reply, “we have no knowledge ˹compared to you˺! you ˹alone˺ are indeed the knower of all unseen.”
supply you with wealth and children, and give you gardens as well as rivers.
they ˹are those who˺ fulfil ˹their˺ vows and fear a day of sweeping horror,
and what will make you realize what the inevitable hour is?
and the ten nights,
and if you are tempted by satan, then seek refuge with allah. indeed, he ˹alone˺ is the all-hearing, all-knowing.
so he brought about their fall through deception. and when they tasted of the tree, their nakedness was exposed to them, prompting them to cover themselves with leaves from paradise. then their lord called out to them, “did i not forbid you from that tree and ˹did i not˺ tell you that satan is your sworn enemy?”
for what crime they were put to death,
we have revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ this book with the truth, as a confirmation of previous scriptures and a supreme authority on them. so judge between them by what allah has revealed, and do not follow their desires over the truth that has come to you. to each of you we have ordained a code of law and a way of life. if allah had willed, he would have made you one community, but his will is to test you with what he has given ˹each of˺ you. so compete with one another in doing good. to allah you will all return, then he will inform you ˹of the truth˺ regarding your differences.
if only there had been a society which believed ˹before seeing the torment˺ and, therefore, benefited from its belief, like the people of jonah.
this is the hell you were warned of.
which weighed so heavily on your back,
and the mountains will be crushed to pieces,
we wrote for him on the tablets ˹the fundamentals˺ of everything; commandments and explanations of all things. ˹we commanded,˺ “hold to this firmly and ask your people to take the best of it.
you worship besides allah nothing but idols, simply creating lies ˹about them˺. those you worship besides allah certainly cannot give you any provision. so seek provision from allah ˹alone˺, worship him, and be grateful to him. to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.
we have appointed only ˹stern˺ angels as wardens of the fire. and we have made their number only as a test for the disbelievers, so that the people of the book will be certain, and the believers will increase in faith, and neither the people of the book nor the believers will have any doubts, and so that those ˹hypocrites˺ with sickness in their hearts and the disbelievers will argue, “what does allah mean by such a number?” in this way allah leaves whoever he wills to stray and guides whoever he wills. and none knows the forces of your lord except he. and this ˹description of hell˺ is only a reminder to humanity.
enjoying whatever their lord will have granted them. and their lord will have protected them from the torment of the hellfire.
their home will be the abyss.
did i not command you, o children of adam, not to follow satan, for he is truly your sworn enemy,
and follow what is revealed to you, and be patient until allah passes his judgment. for he is the best of judges.
if he willed, he could eliminate you and produce a new creation.
there is no blame if you divorce women before the marriage is consummated or the dowry is settled. but give them a ˹suitable˺ compensation—the rich according to his means and the poor according to his. a reasonable compensation is an obligation on the good-doers.
when the quran is recited, listen to it attentively and be silent, so you may be shown mercy.
“as for the ship, it belonged to some poor people, working at sea. so i intended to damage it, for there was a ˹tyrant˺ king ahead of them who seizes every ˹good˺ ship by force.
“we have truly suffered a ˹great˺ loss.
or ˹a soul will˺ say, ‘if only allah had guided me, i would have certainly been one of the righteous.’
now, when a messenger from allah has come to them—confirming their own scriptures—some of the people of the book cast the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know.
indeed, we have created humankind in ˹constant˺ struggle.
and ˹remember˺ when it was said to them, “enter this city ˹of jerusalem˺ and eat from wherever you please. say, ‘absolve us,’ and enter the gate with humility. we will forgive your sins, ˹and˺ we will multiply the reward for the good-doers.”
we are certainly bringing down a punishment from heaven upon the people of this city for their rebelliousness.”
ask ˹them also˺, “imagine if allah were to make the day perpetual for you until the day of judgment, which god other than allah could bring you night to rest in? will you not then see?”
who used to ask ˹me˺, ‘do you actually believe ˹in resurrection˺?
if every wrongdoer were to possess everything in the world, they would surely ransom themselves with it. they will hide ˹their˺ remorse when they see the torment. and they will be judged in all fairness, and none will be wronged.
and do not take your oaths as a means of deceiving one another or your feet will slip after they have been firm. then you will taste the evil ˹consequences˺ of hindering ˹others˺ from the way of allah, and you will suffer a tremendous punishment.
have they not seen the birds above them, spreading and folding their wings? none holds them up except the most compassionate. indeed, he is all-seeing of everything.
it is they who race to do good deeds, always taking the lead.
if only you could see the wicked hanging their heads ˹in shame˺ before their lord, ˹crying:˺ “our lord! we have now seen and heard, so send us back and we will do good. we truly have sure faith ˹now˺!”
on that day every person will flee from their own siblings,
moreover, they will surely burn in hell,
and never say of anything, “i will definitely do this tomorrow,”
˹then˺ on the day we will deal ˹you˺ the fiercest blow, we will surely inflict punishment.
and the residents of midian. and moses was denied ˹too˺. but i delayed ˹the fate of˺ the disbelievers ˹until their appointed time˺ then seized them. and how severe was my response!
so allah has graced us and protected us from the torment of ˹hell’s˺ scorching heat.
and what will make you realize what that is?
surely with ˹that˺ hardship comes ˹more˺ ease.
o people of the book! why do you mix the truth with falsehood and hide the truth knowingly?
have they not reflected upon their own being? allah only created the heavens and the earth and everything in between for a purpose and an appointed term. yet most people are truly in denial of the meeting with their lord!
and we have sent you ˹o prophet˺ only as a deliverer of good news and a warner.
then he raised his parents to the throne, and they all fell down in prostration to joseph, indeed my lord is subtle in fulfilling what he wills. surely he ˹alone˺ is the all-knowing, all-wise.”
and be humble with them out of mercy, and pray, “my lord! be merciful to them as they raised me when i was young.”
that day is the ˹ultimate˺ truth. so let whoever wills take the path leading back to their lord.
but when he came to it, he was called from the bush in the sacred ground to the right side of the valley: “o moses! it is truly i. i am allah—the lord of all worlds.
indeed, this ˹quran˺ is a reminder to those mindful ˹of allah˺.
it is they who will have hell as their home, and they will find no escape from it!
saying, “i am your lord, the most high!”
when it is allah who created you and whatever you do?”
this ˹quran˺ is ˹true˺ guidance. and those who deny their lord’s revelations will suffer the ˹worst˺ torment of agonizing pain.
and as for those who were in awe of standing before their lord and restrained themselves from ˹evil˺ desires,
do you ˹prefer to˺ have sons while ˹you attribute˺ to him daughters?
“by allah! we were clearly mistaken,
had it not been for a prior decree from your lord ˹o prophet˺ and a term already set, their ˹instant˺ doom would have been inevitable.
˹consider˺ when moses said to his people, “remember allah’s favour upon you when he rescued you from the people of pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful torment—slaughtering your sons and keeping your women. that was a severe test from your lord.
˹it will be said to the denier,˺ “you were totally heedless of this. now we have lifted this veil of yours, so today your sight is sharp!”
and to solomon we subjected the raging winds, blowing by his command to the land we had showered with blessings. it is we who know everything.
or are you asking them for a reward ˹for the message˺ so that they are overburdened by debt?
some women of the city gossiped, “the chief minister’s wife is trying to seduce her slave-boy. love for him has plagued her heart. indeed, we see that she is clearly mistaken.”
he has ˹also˺ subjected for you the sun and the moon, both constantly orbiting, and has subjected the day and night for you.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. on the day the hour will be established, the people of falsehood will then be in ˹total˺ loss.
on this day we will seal their mouths, their hands will speak to us, and their feet will testify to what they used to commit.
nor known anything of my reckoning!
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of allah. for satan has made their deeds appealing to them—hindering them from the ˹right˺ way and leaving them unguided—
from allah, lord of pathways of ˹heavenly˺ ascent,
which is harder to create: you or the sky? he built it,
is it you who create ˹a child out of˺ it, or is it we who do so?
we truly subjected the mountains to hymn ˹our praises˺ along with him in the evening and after sunrise.
surely it is we who give life and cause death. and we are the ˹eternal˺ successor.
if only you could see when they will be detained before the fire! they will cry, “oh! if only we could be sent back, we would never deny the signs of our lord and we would ˹surely˺ be of the believers.”
the example of those who spend their wealth in the cause of allah is that of a grain that sprouts into seven ears, each bearing one hundred grains. and allah multiplies ˹the reward even more˺ to whoever he wills. for allah is all-bountiful, all-knowing.
have you considered what you sow?
certainly, allah’s only way is islam. whoever denies allah’s signs, then surely allah is swift in reckoning.
he replied, “yes, and you will certainly be among those closest to me.”
as for those who disbelieve, i will subject them to a severe punishment in this life and the hereafter, and they will have no helpers.
an accommodation from the all-forgiving, most merciful ˹lord˺.”
and others bound together in chains.
glorified is the lord of the heavens and the earth, the lord of the throne, far above what they claim.
their clan that sheltered them,
yet their ˹various˺ groups have differed among themselves ˹about him˺, so woe to the wrongdoers when they face the torment of a painful day!
o believers! if you marry believing women and then divorce them before you touch them, so give them a ˹suitable˺ compensation, and let them go graciously.
they will cry for ˹instant˺ destruction,
indeed, those who unjustly consume orphans’ wealth ˹in fact˺ consume nothing but fire into their bellies. and they will be burned in a blazing hell!
say, “consider this: if your water were to sink ˹into the earth˺, then who ˹else˺ could bring you flowing water?”
o believers! do not consume interest, multiplying it many times over. and be mindful of allah, so you may prosper.
is the one who is a believer equal ˹before allah˺ to the one who is rebellious? they are not equal!
o believers! if you were to yield to a group of those who were given the scripture, they would turn you back from belief to disbelief.
then they killed the she-camel—defying their lord’s command—and challenged ˹salih˺, “bring us what you threaten us with, if you are ˹truly˺ one of the messengers.”
then his wife came forward with a cry, clasping her forehead ˹in astonishment˺, exclaiming, “˹a baby from˺ a barren, old woman!”
when they entered joseph’s presence, he called his brother ˹benjamin˺ aside, and confided ˹to him˺, “i am indeed your brother ˹joseph˺! so do not feel distressed about what they have been doing.”
o children of israel! remember my favours upon you and how i honoured you above the others.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
but ˹continue to˺ remind. for certainly reminders benefit the believers.
close friends will be enemies to one another on that day, except the righteous,
it is we who created them and perfected their ˹physical˺ form. but if we will, we can easily replace them with others.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “everyone acts in their own way. but your lord knows best whose way is rightly guided.”
˹o prophets!˺ indeed, this religion of yours is ˹only˺ one, and i am your lord, so worship me ˹alone˺.
so the punishment overtook them. surely in this is a sign. yet most of them would not believe.
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies allah—the king, the most holy, the almighty, the all-wise.
so we answered his prayer and rescued him from anguish. and so do we save the ˹true˺ believers.
he is the one who gives life and causes death. when he decrees a matter, he simply tells it, “be!” and it is!
indeed, to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. he gives life and causes death. and besides allah you have no guardian or helper.
and he is the one who originated you all from a single soul, then assigned you a place to live and another to ˹be laid to˺ rest. we have already made the signs clear for people who comprehend.
surely those who disbelieve and die as disbelievers are condemned by allah, the angels, and all of humanity.
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. and to allah all matters are returned.
it is to free a slave,
whoever turns back after this, they will be the rebellious.
have they passed this ˹cliché˺ down to one another? in fact, they have ˹all˺ been a transgressing people.
˹it is˺ the day no soul will be of ˹any˺ benefit to another whatsoever, for all authority on that day belongs to allah ˹entirely˺.
they are also pleasing to you when you bring them home and when you take them out to graze.
and he shows you his signs. now which of allah’s signs will you deny?
when we decreed solomon’s death, nothing indicated to the ˹subjected˺ jinn that he was dead except the termites eating away his staff. so when he collapsed, the jinn realized that if they had ˹really˺ known the unseen, they would not have remained in ˹such˺ humiliating servitude.
and when you come across those who ridicule our revelations, do not sit with them unless they engage in a different topic. should satan make you forget, then once you remember, do not ˹continue to˺ sit with the wrongdoing people.
and so he fooled his people, and they obeyed him. they were truly a rebellious people.
there they found a servant of ours, to whom we had granted mercy from us and enlightened with knowledge of our own.
for men there is a share in what their parents and close relatives leave, and for women there is a share in what their parents and close relatives leave—whether it is little or much. ˹these are˺ obligatory shares.
they appealed, “o chief minister! he has a very old father, so take one of us instead. we surely see you as one of the good-doers.”
moses added, “˹he is˺ your lord and the lord of your forefathers.”
and detain them, for they must be questioned.”
as if they were pristine pearls.
noah proclaimed, “o my people! i am truly sent to you with a clear warning:
no soul can ever die without allah’s will at the destined time. those who desire worldly gain, we will let them have it, and those who desire heavenly reward, we will grant it to them. and we will reward those who are grateful.
you will certainly have a never-ending reward.
had he not been shown grace by his lord, he would have certainly been cast onto the open ˹shore˺, still blameworthy.
pharaoh said to the chiefs around him, “he is indeed a skilled magician,
we have sent messengers only as deliverers of good news and as warners. whoever believes and does good, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
˹it is they˺ who are patient, sincere, obedient, and charitable, and who pray for forgiveness before dawn.
we have indeed established you on earth and provided you with a means of livelihood. ˹yet˺ you seldom give any thanks.
and ˹remember, o prophet,˺ when your lord declared that he would send against them others who would make them suffer terribly until the day of judgment. indeed, your lord is swift in punishment, but he is certainly all-forgiving, most merciful.
he said, “you are surely an unfamiliar people!”
but when he gave them out of his bounty, they withheld it and turned away indifferently.
is it they who distribute your lord’s mercy? we ˹alone˺ have distributed their ˹very˺ livelihood among them in this worldly life and raised some of them in rank above others so that some may employ others in service. ˹but˺ your lord’s mercy is far better than whatever ˹wealth˺ they amass.
and ˹so˺ my heart will be broken and my tongue will be tied. so send aaron along ˹as a messenger˺.
neither his wealth nor ˹worldly˺ gains will benefit him.
pharaoh threatened, “how dare you believe in him before i give you permission? this must be a conspiracy you devised in the city to drive out its people, but soon you will see.
˹the one˺ to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and earth. and allah is a witness over all things.
they replied, “our lord! we have wronged ourselves. if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we will certainly be losers.”
o people of faith! fear allah and believe in his messenger. ˹and˺ he will grant you a double share of his mercy, provide you with a light to walk in ˹on judgment day˺, and forgive you. for allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
my lord! make me and those ˹believers˺ of my descendants keep up prayer. our lord! accept my prayers.
see then what was the end of those who had been warned.
allah ˹himself˺ is a witness that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him—and so are the angels and people of knowledge. he is the maintainer of justice. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him—the almighty, all-wise.
so when her husband saw that joseph’s shirt was torn from the back, he said ˹to her˺, “this must be ˹an example˺ of the cunning of you ˹women˺! indeed, your cunning is so shrewd!
o believers! obey allah and obey the messenger and those in authority among you. should you disagree on anything, then refer it to allah and his messenger, if you ˹truly˺ believe in allah and the last day. this is the best and fairest resolution.
which travel and hide,
but if they turn away, we have not sent you ˹o prophet˺ as a keeper over them. your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. and indeed, when we let someone taste a mercy from us, they become prideful ˹because˺ of it. but when afflicted with evil because of what their hands have done, then one becomes totally ungrateful.
and turn away from them for a while.
for they have been guided to the best of speech, and they have been guided to the commendable path.
and to the people of thamûd we sent their brother salih. he said, “o my people! worship allah. you have no god other than him. he ˹is the one who˺ produced you from the earth and settled you on it. so seek his forgiveness and turn to him in repentance. surely my lord is ever near, all-responsive ˹to prayers˺.”
as a test for them. and whoever turns away from the remembrance of their lord will be admitted by him into an overwhelming punishment.
and they fall down upon their faces weeping, and it increases them in humility.”
˹this is˺ a book sent down to you ˹o prophet˺—do not let anxiety into your heart regarding it—so with it you may warn ˹the disbelievers˺, and as a reminder to the believers.
all ˹believers˺ will be reclining on green cushions and splendid carpets.
indeed, we sent our messengers with clear proofs, and with them we sent down the scripture and the balance ˹of justice˺ so that people may administer justice. and we sent down iron with its great might, benefits for humanity, and means for allah to prove who ˹is willing to˺ stand up for him and his messengers without seeing him. surely allah is all-powerful, almighty.
if you are tempted by satan, then seek refuge with allah. surely he is all-hearing, all-knowing.
˹he is the one˺ who created seven heavens, one above the other. you will never see any imperfection in the creation of the most compassionate. so look again: do you see any flaws?
so that no ˹sinful˺ soul will say ˹on judgment day˺, ‘woe to me for neglecting ˹my duties towards˺ allah, while ridiculing ˹the truth˺.’
˹honouring˺ the sabbath was ordained only for those who disputed about abraham. and surely your lord will judge between them on the day of judgment regarding their disputes.
and those who maintain whatever ˹ties˺ allah has ordered to be maintained, stand in awe of their lord, and fear strict judgment.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “my lord has commanded uprightness and dedication ˹to him alone˺ in worship, calling upon him with sincere devotion. just as he first brought you into being, you will be brought to life again.”
and to the people of midian ˹we sent˺ their brother shu’aib. he said, “o my people! worship allah, and hope for ˹the reward of˺ the last day. and do not go about spreading corruption in the land.”
he responds to those who believe and do good, and increases their reward out of his grace. as for the disbelievers, they will suffer a severe punishment.
this is an insight to humanity—a guide and a lesson to the god-fearing.
he is the one who has sent his messenger with ˹true˺ guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others, even to the dismay of the polytheists.
they challenge you ˹o prophet˺ to hasten the punishment. had it not been for a time already set, the punishment would have certainly come to them ˹at once˺. but it will definitely take them by surprise when they least expect it.
guide us along the straight path,
except those who have faith, do good, and urge each other to the truth, and urge each other to perseverance.
and who do whatever ˹good˺ they do with their hearts fearful, ˹knowing˺ that they will return to their lord—
those who persecute the believing men and women and then do not repent will certainly suffer the punishment of hell and the torment of burning.
as for those who believe and do good, they will have the finest reward, and we will assign them easy commands.”
the weighing on that day will be just. as for those whose scale will be heavy ˹with good deeds˺, ˹only˺ they will be successful.
indeed, moses came to you with clear proofs, then you worshipped the calf in his absence, acting wrongfully.
joseph said, “there is no blame on you today. may allah forgive you! he is the most merciful of the merciful!
whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded with what is better, and they will be secure from the horror on that day.
as for the sky, he raised it ˹high˺, and set the balance ˹of justice˺
they will ask their skin ˹furiously˺, “why have you testified against us?” it will say, “we have been made to speak by allah, who causes all things to speak. he ˹is the one who˺ created you the first time, and to him you were bound to return.
and the heart of moses’ mother ached so much that she almost gave away his identity, had we not reassured her heart in order for her to have faith ˹in allah’s promise˺.
and ˹remember˺ when a group of them said, “o people of yathrib! there is no point in you staying ˹here˺, so retreat!” another group of them asked the prophet’s permission ˹to leave˺, saying, “our homes are vulnerable,” while ˹in fact˺ they were not vulnerable. they only wished to flee.
read! and your lord is the most generous,
but we cast him onto the open ˹shore˺, ˹totally˺ worn out,
it is upon allah ˹alone˺ to ˹clearly˺ show the straight way. other ways are deviant. had he willed, he would have easily imposed guidance upon all of you.
but those gifted with knowledge said, “shame on you! allah’s reward is far better for those who believe and do good. but none will attain this except the steadfast.”
the mosques of allah should only be maintained by those who believe in allah and the last day, establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and fear none but allah. it is right to hope that they will be among the ˹truly˺ guided.
˹remember˺ when your lord called out to moses, “go to the wrongdoing people—
˹remember˺ when you were on the near side of the valley, your enemy on the far side, and the caravan was below you. even if the two armies had made an appointment ˹to meet˺, both would have certainly missed it. still it transpired so allah may establish what he had destined—that those who were to perish and those who were to survive might do so after the truth had been made clear to both. surely allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
those who deny our signs are ˹wilfully˺ deaf and dumb—lost in darkness. allah leaves whoever he wills to stray and guides whoever he wills to the straight way.
be upright ˹in devotion˺ to allah, associating none with him ˹in worship˺. for whoever associates ˹others˺ with allah is like someone who has fallen from the sky and is either snatched away by birds or swept by the wind to a remote place.
those who violate allah’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break whatever ˹ties˺ allah has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in the land. it is they who are the ˹true˺ losers.
and the residents of the forest were truly wrongdoers,
but they killed her, becoming regretful.
joseph already came to you earlier with clear proofs, yet you never ceased to doubt what he came to you with. when he died you said, ‘allah will never send a messenger after him.’ this is how allah leaves every transgressor and doubter to stray—
he is the one who sends down clear revelations to his servant to bring you out of darkness and into light. for indeed allah is ever gracious and most merciful to you.
had they ˹really˺ intended to march forth, they would have made preparations for it. but allah disliked that they should go, so he let them lag behind, and it was said ˹to them˺, “stay with those ˹helpless˺ who remain behind.”
it is they who are the true believers. they will have elevated ranks, forgiveness, and an honourable provision from their lord.
he will burn in a flaming fire,
and when baby girls, buried alive, are asked
joseph proposed, “put me in charge of the store-houses of the land, for i am truly reliable and adept.”
‘put him into a chest, then put it into the river. the river will wash it ashore, and he will be taken by ˹pharaoh,˺ an enemy of mine and his.’ and i blessed you with lovability from me ˹o moses˺ so that you would be brought up under my ˹watchful˺ eye.
or until you have a house of gold, or you ascend into heaven—and even then we will not believe in your ascension until you bring down to us a book that we can read.” say, “glory be to my lord! am i not only a human messenger?”
they will each be assigned ranks according to their deeds. and your lord is not unaware of what they do.
only the one who hates you is truly cut off ˹from any goodness˺.
˹then the disbelievers will be told,˺ “step away ˹from the believers˺ this day, o wicked ones!
and do not walk on the earth arrogantly. surely you can neither crack the earth nor stretch to the height of the mountains.
on that day one will cry, “where is the escape?”
he responded, “o my people! consider if i stand on a clear proof from my lord and he has blessed me with a mercy from him. who could help me against allah if i were to disobey him? you would only contribute to my doom.
the most compassionate, ˹who is˺ established on the throne.
and ˹remember˺ when job cried out to his lord, “i have been touched with adversity, and you are the most merciful of the merciful.”
when they reach it, their ears, eyes, and skin will testify against what they used to do.
and so we have revealed to you a quran in arabic, so you may warn the mother of cities and everyone around it, and warn of the day of gathering—about which there is no doubt—˹when˺ a group will be in paradise and another in the blaze.
they ask you ˹o prophet˺ to hasten the torment rather than grace, though there have ˹already˺ been ˹many˺ torments before them. surely your lord is full of forgiveness for people, despite their wrongdoing, and your lord is truly severe in punishment.
whoever of them were to say, “i am a god besides him,” they would be rewarded with hell by us. this is how we reward the wrongdoers.
nor ˹is there any blame on˺ those who came to you ˹o prophet˺ for mounts, then when you said, “i can find no mounts for you,” they left with eyes overflowing with tears out of grief that they had nothing to contribute.
likewise, the pagans’ evil associates have made it appealing to them to kill their own children—only leading to their destruction as well as confusion in their faith. had it been allah’s will, they would not have done such a thing. so leave them and their falsehood.
we have certainly set forth every ˹kind of˺ lesson for people in this quran. and no matter what sign you bring to them ˹o prophet˺, the disbelievers will definitely say ˹to the believers˺, “you are only a people of falsehood.”
and shake the trunk of this palm tree towards you, it will drop fresh, ripe dates upon you.
say, “would you dispute with us about allah, while he is our lord and your lord? we are accountable for our deeds and you for yours. and we are devoted to him ˹alone˺.
indeed, we took a covenant from the children of israel and sent them messengers. whenever a messenger came to them with what they did not desire, they denied some and killed others.
˹say to the believers, o prophet,˺ “whatever you may differ about, its judgment rests with allah. that is allah—my lord. in him i put my trust, and to him i ˹always˺ turn.”
we only delay it for a fixed term.
then which of your lord’s favours will you both deny?
as for those who emigrated in ˹the cause of˺ allah after being persecuted, we will surely bless them with a good home in this world. but the reward of the hereafter is far better, if only they knew.
˹still˺ there are some who dispute about allah without knowledge, and follow every rebellious devil.
and does not encourage the feeding of the poor.
˹on that day˺ paradise will be brought near to the god-fearing,
that is because allah has revealed the book in truth. and surely those who differ regarding it are totally engrossed in opposition.
and ˹remember˺ when we assigned to abraham the site of the house, ˹saying,˺ “do not associate anything with me ˹in worship˺ and purify my house for those who circle ˹the ka’bah˺, stand ˹in prayer˺, and bow and prostrate themselves.
˹allah added,˺ “you will truly have no authority over my ˹faithful˺ servants.” and sufficient is your lord as a guardian.
indeed, that is my path—perfectly straight. so follow it and do not follow other ways, for they will lead you away from his way. this is what he has commanded you, so perhaps you will be conscious ˹of allah˺.”
every soul will taste death. and you will only receive your full reward on the day of judgment. whoever is spared from the fire and is admitted into paradise will ˹indeed˺ triumph, whereas the life of this world is no more than the delusion of enjoyment.
they will cry, “o malik! let your lord finish us off.” he will answer, “you are definitely here to stay.”
then they were not able to rise up, nor were they helped.
he said, “but lot is there!” they responded, “we know best who is there. we will certainly save him and his family—except his wife, who is one of the doomed.”
and many spoils of war they will gain. for allah is almighty, all-wise.
and ˹so˺ the ark sailed with them through waves like mountains. noah called out to his son, who stood apart, “o my dear son! come aboard with us and do not be with the disbelievers.”
indeed, we have believed in our lord so he may forgive our sins and that magic you have forced us to practice. and allah is far superior ˹in reward˺ and more lasting ˹in punishment˺.”
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment,
˹both˺ thamûd and ’ȃd denied the striking disaster.
nũn. by the pen and what everyone writes!
again, woe to you, and even more woe!
do they not then reflect on the quran? or are there locks upon their hearts?
so allah overtook him, making him an example in this life and the next.
then as for those who transgressed
do you find this revelation astonishing,
o believers! stand up for allah, as jesus, son of mary, asked the disciples, “who will stand up with me for allah?” the disciples replied, “we will stand up for allah.” then a group from the children of israel believed while another disbelieved. we then supported the believers against their enemies, so they prevailed.
in times of prosperity, they said, “this is what we deserve,” but in adversity, they blamed it on moses and those with him. surely all is destined by allah. yet most of them did not know.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “on the day of decision it will not benefit the disbelievers to believe then, nor will they be delayed ˹from punishment˺.”
when the sun is put out,
we dispersed them through the land in groups—some were righteous, others were less so. we tested them with prosperity and adversity, so perhaps they would return ˹to the right path˺.
the people replied, “we definitely see you as a bad omen for us. if you do not desist, we will certainly stone you ˹to death˺ and you will be touched with a painful punishment from us.”
instead, prostrate to allah and worship ˹him alone˺!
there is no soul without a vigilant angel ˹recording everything˺.
do not be deceived by the prosperity of the disbelievers throughout the land.
if they deny you ˹o prophet˺, so did the people of noah before them, as well as ˹the tribes of˺ ’ȃd and thamûd,
had allah given abundant provisions to ˹all˺ his servants, they would have certainly transgressed throughout the land. but he sends down whatever he wills in perfect measure. he is truly all-aware, all-seeing of his servants.
it is impossible for a society which we have destroyed to ever rise again,
or ˹because˺ they say, “he is insane?” in fact, he has come to them with the truth, but most of them are resentful of the truth.
they asked, “o moses! will you cast, or shall we be the first to cast?”
have they not realized that allah, who created the heavens and the earth, can ˹easily˺ re-create them? he has ˹already˺ set for them a time, about which there is no doubt. but the wrongdoers persist in denial.
then we raised them so we may show which of the two groups would make a better estimation of the length of their stay.
do not let their words grieve you ˹o prophet˺. surely all honour and power belongs to allah. he is the all-hearing, all-knowing.
we will soon mark his snout.
and muse ˹over these exploits˺ upon returning to their own people.
whenever we sent a warner to a society, its elite would say, “we truly reject what you have been sent with.”
and we have subjected these ˹animals˺ to them, so they may ride some and eat others.
those who are certain that they will meet their lord and to him they will return.
give orphans their wealth ˹when they reach maturity˺, and do not exchange your worthless possessions for their valuables, nor cheat them by mixing their wealth with your own. for this would indeed be a great sin.
the messengers had come to them from all angles, ˹proclaiming,˺ “worship none but allah.” they responded, “had our lord willed, he could have easily sent down angels ˹instead˺. so we totally reject what you have been sent with.”
he frowned and turned ˹his attention˺ away,
they ask you ˹o prophet˺ about menstruation. say, “beware of its harm! so keep away, and do not have intercourse with your wives during their monthly cycles until they are purified. when they purify themselves, then you may approach them in the manner specified by allah. surely allah loves those who always turn to him in repentance and those who purify themselves.”
and allah drove back the disbelievers in their rage, totally empty-handed. and allah spared the believers from fighting. for allah is all-powerful, almighty.
they wish you would compromise so they would yield ˹to you˺.
yet, whenever they see a sign, they turn away, saying, “same old magic!”
o people of the book! why do you argue about abraham, while the torah and the gospel were not revealed until long after him? do you not understand?
and granted him abundant wealth,
and you ˹o prophet˺ see the people embracing allah’s way in crowds,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “if the most compassionate ˹really˺ had offspring, i would be the first worshipper.”
and ˹so will˺ his wife, the carrier of ˹thorny˺ kindling,
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask for exemption from striving with their wealth and their lives. and allah has perfect knowledge of those who are mindful ˹of him˺.
o believers! donate from the best of what you have earned and of what we have produced for you from the earth. do not pick out worthless things for donation, which you yourselves would only accept with closed eyes. and know that allah is self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
we reassured ˹him˺, “do not fear! it is certainly you who will prevail.
he responded, “it would truly sadden me if you took him away with you, and i fear that a wolf may devour him while you are negligent of him.”
and humanity cries, “what is wrong with it?”—
so do not oppress the orphan,
whether you reveal or conceal a good or pardon an evil—surely allah is ever-pardoning, most capable.
when it is recited to them, they declare, “we believe in it. this is definitely the truth from our lord. we had already submitted ˹even˺ before this.”
and then we truly would have made you taste double ˹punishment˺ both in this life and after death, and you would have found no helper against us.
and they will be given a drink ˹of pure wine˺ flavoured with ginger
awaiting them is hell. their ˹worldly˺ gains will not be of any benefit to them whatsoever, nor will those protectors they have taken besides allah. and they will suffer a tremendous punishment.
from what substance did he create them?
and if the deceased is one of the people of the right,
the truth is: you thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families again. and that was made appealing in your hearts. you harboured evil thoughts ˹about allah˺, and ˹so˺ became a doomed people.”
o believers! do not follow the footsteps of satan. whoever follows satan’s footsteps, then ˹let them know that˺ he surely bids ˹all to˺ immorality and wickedness. had it not been for allah’s grace and mercy upon you, none of you would have ever been purified. but allah purifies whoever he wills. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
he said, “you certainly cannot be patient ˹enough˺ with me.
until ˹after˺ gog and magog have broken loose ˹from the barrier˺, swarming down from every hill,
˹now,˺ we truly know that we cannot frustrate allah on earth, nor can we escape from him ˹into heaven˺.
˹the believers among˺ those who were given the scripture rejoice at what has been revealed to you ˹o prophet˺, while some ˹disbelieving˺ factions deny a portion of it. say, “i have only been commanded to worship allah, associating none with him ˹in worship˺. to him i invite ˹all˺, and to him is my return.”
on that day they will be driven to your lord ˹alone˺.
and those in the fire will cry out to the keepers of hell, “pray to your lord to lighten the torment for us ˹even˺ for one day!”
indeed, the righteous will be amid gardens and springs,
so do not yield to the disbelievers, but strive diligently against them with this ˹quran˺.
and ˹one day˺ the king said, “i dreamt of seven fat cows eaten up by seven skinny ones; and seven green ears of grain and ˹seven˺ others dry. o chiefs! tell me the meaning of my dream if you can interpret dreams.”
we certainly left this as a sign. so is there anyone who will be mindful?
those who hide the clear proofs and guidance that we have revealed—after we made it clear for humanity in the book—will be condemned by allah and ˹all˺ those who condemn.
˹he is˺ the originator of the heavens and earth. how could he have children when he has no mate? he created all things and has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of everything.
wait then! they too are certainly waiting.
and ˹remember˺ when we appointed forty nights for moses, then you worshipped the calf in his absence, acting wrongfully.
˹charity is˺ for the needy who are too engaged in the cause of allah to move about in the land ˹for work˺. those unfamiliar with their situation will think they are not in need ˹of charity˺ because they do not beg. you can recognize them by their appearance. they do not beg people persistently. whatever you give in charity is certainly well known to allah.
pharaoh threatened, “how dare you believe in him before i give you permission? he must be your master who taught you magic. i will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. you will really see whose punishment is more severe and more lasting.”
were it not that people might ˹be tempted to˺ become one community ˹of disbelievers˺, we would have supplied the homes of ˹only˺ those who disbelieve in the most compassionate with silver roofs and ˹silver˺ stairways to ascend,
indeed, we sent noah to his people, and he remained among them for a thousand years, less fifty. then the flood overtook them, while they persisted in wrongdoing.
they swear by allah their most solemn oaths that allah will never raise the dead to life. yes ˹he will˺! it is a true promise binding on him, but most people do not know.
indeed, we revealed the torah, containing guidance and light, by which the prophets, who submitted themselves to allah, made judgments for jews. so too did the rabbis and scholars judge according to allah’s book, with which they were entrusted and of which they were made keepers. so do not fear the people; fear me! nor trade my revelations for a fleeting gain. and those who do not judge by what allah has revealed are ˹truly˺ the disbelievers.
with it we produce for you gardens of palm trees and grapevines, in which there are abundant fruits, and from which you may eat,
they protested, “o noah! you have argued with us far too much, so bring upon us what you threaten us with, if what you say is true.”
and those who violate allah’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break whatever ˹ties˺ allah has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in the land—it is they who will be condemned and will have the worst abode.
you have certainly made an outrageous claim,
and we relate to you ˹o prophet˺ the stories of the messengers to reassure your heart. and there has come to you in this ˹sûrah˺ the truth, a warning ˹to the disbelievers˺, and a reminder to the believers.
the lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, the most compassionate. no one will dare speak to him
have they not received the stories of those ˹destroyed˺ before them: the people of noah, ’ad, and thamûd, the people of abraham, the residents of midian, and the overturned cities ˹of lot˺? their messengers came to them with clear proofs. allah would have never wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves.
and they will lament, “if only we had listened and reasoned, we would not be among the residents of the blaze!”
do you preach righteousness and fail to practice it yourselves, although you read the scripture? do you not understand?
leaving them like chewed up straw.
do such people not think that they will be resurrected
but they said, “our lord! make ˹the distances of˺ our journeys longer,” wronging themselves. so we reduced them to ˹cautionary˺ tales, and scattered them utterly. surely in this are lessons for whoever is steadfast, grateful.
and the earth with its sprouting plants!
we had also placed between them and the cities we showered with blessings ˹many small˺ towns within sight of one another. and we set moderate travel distances in between, ˹saying,˺ “travel between them by day and night safely.”
surely those who recite the book of allah, establish prayer, and donate from what we have provided for them—secretly and openly—˹can˺ hope for an exchange that will never fail,
if only there had been among the ˹destroyed˺ peoples before you, ˹o believers,˺ virtuous individuals who forbade corruption in the land—other than the few we had saved ˹from the torment˺. but the wrongdoers ˹only˺ pursued their ˹worldly˺ pleasures, becoming wicked.
surely this religion of yours is ˹only˺ one, and i am your lord, so fear me ˹alone˺.
and ˹watch for˺ the day he will call to them, “where are those you claimed were my associate-gods?”
upon this world and the hereafter. and they ask you ˹o prophet˺ concerning orphans. say, “improving their condition is best. and if you partner with them, they are bonded with you ˹in faith˺. surely allah is almighty, all-wise.”
do they not know that when the contents of the graves will be spilled out,
they cried, “our father! we went racing and left joseph with our belongings, and a wolf devoured him! but you will not believe us, no matter how truthful we are.”
whenever our revelations are recited to them, they turn away in arrogance as if they did not hear them, as if there is deafness in their ears. so give them good news ˹o prophet˺ of a painful punishment.
what is the matter with you? how do you judge?
had we intended to take ˹some˺ amusement, we could have found it in our presence, if that had been our will.
we surely gave moses nine clear signs. ˹you, o prophet, can˺ ask the children of israel. when moses came to them, pharaoh said to him, “i really think that you, o moses, are bewitched.”
˹always˺ remember what is recited in your homes of allah’s revelations and ˹prophetic˺ wisdom. surely allah is most subtle, all-aware.
do they not realize that allah, who created the heavens and the earth and did not tire in creating them, is able to give life to the dead? yes ˹indeed˺! he is certainly most capable of everything.
so, i do swear by the twilight!
o believers! when you face the disbelievers in battle, never turn your backs to them.
they glorify ˹him˺ day and night, never wavering.
˹on that day˺ each soul will know what ˹deeds˺ it has brought along.
this is how we reward whoever transgresses and does not believe in the revelations of their lord. and the punishment of the hereafter is far more severe and more lasting.
we caused a curse to follow them in this world. and on the day of judgment they will be among the outcasts.
they have certainly passed by the city ˹of sodom˺, which had been showered with a dreadful rain ˹of stones˺. have they not seen its ruins? but they do not expect to be resurrected.
and as for those who believe and do good, they will be rewarded in full. and allah does not like the wrongdoers.”
say, “i have no power to benefit or protect myself, except by the will of allah. if i had known the unknown, i would have benefited myself enormously, and no harm would have ever touched me. i am only a warner and deliverer of good news for those who believe.”
conveying to you my lord’s messages. and i am your sincere advisor.
but ˹now˺ they reject it, so they will soon know.
and they will say, “our lord! we obeyed our leaders and elite, but they led us astray from the ˹right˺ way.
we certainly thought that humans and jinn would never speak lies about allah.
which none will eat except the evildoers.”
that we hasten to ˹honour˺ them ˹with˺ all kinds of good? no! they are not aware.
o children of israel! we saved you from your enemy, and made an appointment with you
allah only accepts the repentance of those who commit evil ignorantly ˹or recklessly˺ then repent soon after—allah will pardon them. and allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
into your heart ˹o prophet˺—so that you may be one of the warners—
and pharaoh said, “let me kill moses, and let him call upon his lord! i truly fear that he may change your traditions or cause mischief in the land.”
all praise is for allah, the originator of the heavens and the earth, who made angels ˹as his˺ messengers with wings—two, three, or four. he increases in creation whatever he wills. surely allah is most capable of everything.
or have we sent down to them an authority which attests to what they associate ˹with him˺?
as for the earth, we spread it out and placed upon it firm mountains, and caused everything to grow there in perfect balance.
when they entered joseph’s presence, he received his parents ˹graciously˺ and said, “enter egypt, allah willing, in security.”
then said, “i am really sick.”
these ˹prophets˺ were ˹rightly˺ guided by allah, so follow their guidance. say, “i ask no reward of you for this ˹quran˺—it is a reminder to the whole world.”
every being on earth is bound to perish.
it is certainly we who have revealed the reminder, and it is certainly we who will preserve it.
allah has promised those who believe and do good ˹his˺ forgiveness and a great reward.
those who humble themselves in prayer;
he is the one who created everything in the earth for you. then he turned towards the heaven, forming it into seven heavens. and he has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
by your lord ˹o prophet˺! we will surely gather them along with the devils, and then set them around hell on their knees.
woe to the defrauders!
indeed, those who believe, do good, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax will receive their reward from their lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
except helpless men, women, and children who cannot afford a way out—
indeed, allah commands you to return trusts to their rightful owners; and when you judge between people, judge with fairness. what a noble commandment from allah to you! surely allah is all-hearing, all-seeing.
surely in this is a sign for those who fear the torment of the hereafter. that is a day for which humanity will be gathered and a day ˹that will be˺ witnessed ˹by all˺.
do they think that no one has power over them,
indeed, we have made this ˹quran˺ easy in your own language ˹o prophet˺ so perhaps they will be mindful.
and to solomon ˹we subjected˺ the wind: its morning stride was a month’s journey and so was its evening stride. and we caused a stream of molten copper to flow for him, and ˹we subjected˺ some of the jinn to work under him by his lord’s will. and whoever of them deviated from our command, we made them taste the torment of the blaze.
but you were ˹so busy˺ making fun of them that it made you forget my remembrance. and you used to laugh at them.
you already have an excellent example in abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, “we totally dissociate ourselves from you and ˹shun˺ whatever ˹idols˺ you worship besides allah. we reject you. the enmity and hatred that has arisen between us and you will last until you believe in allah alone.” the only exception is when abraham said to his father, “i will seek forgiveness for you,˹” adding, “but˺ i cannot protect you from allah at all.” ˹the believers prayed,˺ “our lord! in you we trust. and to you we ˹always˺ turn. and to you is the final return.
but no! they will come to know.
indeed, those who trade allah’s covenant and their oaths for a fleeting gain will have no share in the hereafter. allah will neither speak to them, nor look at them, nor purify them on the day of judgment. and they will suffer a painful punishment.
you will then be presented ˹before him for judgment˺, and none of your secrets will stay hidden.
and we will ˹continually˺ provide them with whatever fruit or meat they desire.
allah! there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him—the ever-living, all-sustaining.
so today no ransom will be accepted from you ˹hypocrites˺, nor from the disbelievers. your home is the fire—it is the ˹only˺ fitting place for you. what an evil destination!”
or do they envy the people for allah’s bounties? indeed, we have given the descendants of abraham the book and wisdom, along with great authority.
if there were a recitation that could cause mountains to move, or the earth to split, or the dead to speak, ˹it would have been this quran˺. but all matters are by allah’s will. have the believers not yet realized that had allah willed, he could have guided all of humanity? and disasters will continue to afflict the disbelievers or strike close to their homes for their misdeeds, until allah’s promise comes to pass. surely allah never fails in his promise.
then when they see the torment drawing near, the faces of the disbelievers will become gloomy, and it will be said ˹to them˺, “this is what you claimed would never come.”
do they not see that we made the night for them to rest in and the day bright? surely in this are signs for those who believe.
there they will recline, calling for abundant fruit and drink.
and, although their hearts were convinced the signs were true, they still denied them wrongfully and arrogantly. see then what was the end of the corruptors!
as for the earth, he spread it out as well,
but no! ˹beware of the day˺ when the soul reaches the collar bone ˹as it leaves˺,
and a pair of camels and a pair of oxen. ask ˹them˺, “has he forbidden ˹to you˺ the two males or the two females or what is in the wombs of the two females? or were you present when allah gave you this commandment?” who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against allah to mislead others without ˹any˺ knowledge? surely allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
the sky will then be so torn that it will be frail,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o jews! if you claim to be allah’s chosen ˹people˺ out of all humanity, then wish for death, if what you say is true.”
then i surely preached to them publicly and privately,
allah has promised you ˹believers˺ abundant spoils, which you will gain, so he hastened this ˹truce˺ for you. and he has held people’s hands back from ˹harming˺ you, so it may be a sign for the believers, and so he may guide you along the straight path.
this is a blessed book which we have revealed—confirming what came before it—so you may warn the mother of cities and everyone around it. those who believe in the hereafter ˹truly˺ believe in it and guard their prayers.
and by heaven and ˹the one˺ who built it,
o believers! be mindful of allah in the way he deserves,
whoever seeks a way other than islam, it will never be accepted from them, and in the hereafter they will be among the losers.
which they will sip with difficulty, and can hardly swallow. death will overwhelm them from every side, yet they will not ˹be able to˺ die. awaiting them still is harsher torment.
those who listen to what is said and follow the best of it. these are the ones ˹rightly˺ guided by allah, and these are ˹truly˺ the people of reason.
indeed, the wicked used to laugh at the believers,
and two other servants went to jail with joseph. one of them said, “i dreamt i was pressing wine.” the other said, “i dreamt i was carrying ˹some˺ bread on my head, from which birds were eating.” ˹then both said,˺ “tell us their interpretation, for we surely see you as one of the good-doers.”
withholder of good, transgressor, evildoer,
and from those who say, “we are christians,” we took their covenant, but they neglected a portion of what they had been commanded to uphold. so we let hostility and enmity arise between them until the day of judgment, and soon allah will inform them of all they have done.
that was ’ad. they denied the signs of their lord, disobeyed his messengers, and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant.
and ˹make him˺ a messenger to the children of israel ˹to proclaim,˺ ‘i have come to you with a sign from your lord: i will make for you a bird from clay, breathe into it, and it will become a ˹real˺ bird—by allah’s will. i will heal the blind and the leper and raise the dead to life—by allah’s will. and i will prophesize what you eat and store in your houses. surely in this is a sign for you if you ˹truly˺ believe.
so he turned away from them, saying, “o my people! surely i conveyed to you my lord’s message and gave you ˹sincere˺ advice, but you do not like ˹sincere˺ advisors.”
˹but now˺ they ask ˹mockingly˺, “will we really be restored to our former state,
and whoever comes with an evil deed will be hurled face-first into the fire. are you rewarded except for what you used to do?
if we had willed, we would have elevated him with our signs, but he clung to this life—following his evil desires. his example is that of a dog: if you chase it away, it pants, and if you leave it, it ˹still˺ pants. this is the example of the people who deny our signs. so narrate ˹to them˺ stories ˹of the past˺, so perhaps they will reflect.
there are messengers whose stories we have told you already and others we have not. and to moses allah spoke directly.
and as for those who disbelieved, and denied our signs and the meeting ˹with allah˺ in the hereafter, they will be confined in punishment.
˹it all happened˺ so allah may reward the faithful for their faithfulness, and punish the hypocrites if he wills or turn to them ˹in mercy˺. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
o prophet! we have sent you as a witness, and a deliverer of good news, and a warner,
i do swear by the day of judgment!
the most compassionate, most merciful,
surely in this is a sign for those who believe.
or do they say, “he has fabricated it!”? no! it is the truth from your lord in order for you to warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so they may be ˹rightly˺ guided.
follow ˹the quran,˺ the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord, before the punishment takes you by surprise while you are unaware,
and how could you take it back after having enjoyed each other intimately and she has taken from you a firm commitment?
indeed, allah was pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance to you ˹o prophet˺ under the tree. he knew what was in their hearts, so he sent down serenity upon them and rewarded them with a victory at hand,
except our first death, nor be punished ˹like the others˺?”
in a nearby land. yet following their defeat, they will triumph
and glorify him during part of the night and after the prayers.
˹fast a˺ prescribed number of days. compensation can be made by feeding a needy person ˹for every day not fasted˺. but whoever volunteers to give more, it is better for them. and to fast is better for you, if only you knew.
and whoever turns a blind eye to the reminder of the most compassionate, we place at the disposal of each a devilish one as their close associate,
muhammad is the messenger of allah. and those with him are firm with the disbelievers to those of them who believe and do good, allah has promised forgiveness and a great reward.
whatever you have will end, but whatever allah has is everlasting. and we will certainly reward the steadfast according to the best of their deeds.
indeed, when the floodwater had overflowed, we carried you in the floating ark ˹with noah˺,
o you who were given the book! believe in what we have revealed—confirming your own scriptures—before we wipe out ˹your˺ faces, turning them backwards, or we condemn the defiant as we did to the sabbath-breakers. and allah’s command is always executed!
so that we may glorify you much
˹this is˺ a reminder of your lord’s mercy to his servant zachariah,
˹consider˺ the day we will gather them all together then say to those who associated others ˹with allah in worship˺, “stay in your places—you and your associate-gods.” we will separate them from each other, and their associate-gods will say, “it was not us that you worshipped!
˹remember˺ when you cried out to your lord for help, he answered, “i will reinforce you with a thousand angels—followed by many others.”
they will swear to you in order to please you. and even if you are pleased with them, allah will never be pleased with the rebellious people.
the creation and resurrection of you ˹all˺ is as simple ˹for him˺ as that of a single soul. surely allah is all-hearing, all-seeing.
if you act rightly, it is for your own good, but if you do wrong, it is to your own loss. “and when the second warning would come to pass, your enemies would ˹be left to˺ totally disgrace you and enter the temple ˹of jerusalem˺ as they entered it the first time, and utterly destroy whatever would fall into their hands.
has the story of the ˹destroyed˺ forces reached you ˹o prophet˺—
surely ˹for˺ muslim men and women, believing men and women, devout men and women, truthful men and women, patient men and women, humble men and women, charitable men and women, fasting men and women, men and women who guard their chastity, and men and women who remember allah often—for ˹all of˺ them allah has prepared forgiveness and a great reward.
the prophet has a stronger affinity to the believers than they do themselves. and his wives are their mothers. as ordained by allah, blood relatives are more entitled ˹to inheritance˺ than ˹other˺ believers and immigrants, unless you ˹want to˺ show kindness to your ˹close˺ associates ˹through bequest˺.
thamûd rejected ˹the truth˺ out of arrogance,
those ˹are the˺ societies we destroyed when they persisted in wrong, and we had set a time for their destruction.
when he questioned his father and his people, “what is that you worship ˹besides allah˺?”
and seek your lord’s forgiveness and turn to him in repentance. he will grant you a good provision for an appointed term and graciously reward the doers of good. but if you turn away, then i truly fear for you the torment of a formidable day.
whenever they try to escape from hell—out of anguish—they will be forced back into it, ˹and will be told,˺ “taste the torment of burning!”
we have not created the heavens and the earth and everything in between except for a purpose. and the hour is certain to come, so forgive graciously.
those who disbelieved will bear ˹the burden of˺ their own disbelief; and those who did good will have prepared for themselves ˹eternal homes˺,
it is they who are ˹truly˺ guided by their lord, and it is they who will be successful.
pharaoh asked, “who then is the lord of you two, o moses?”
as for abraham’s prayer for his father’s forgiveness, it was only in fulfilment of a promise he had made to him. but when it became clear to abraham that his father was an enemy of allah, he broke ties with him. abraham was truly tender-hearted, forbearing.
they are the ones whose hearts, ears, and eyes are sealed by allah, and it is they who are ˹truly˺ heedless.
they responded, “have we not forbidden you from protecting anyone?”
noah pleaded, “my lord, i seek refuge in you from asking you about what i have no knowledge of, and unless you forgive me and have mercy on me, i will be one of the losers.”
and if you ˹idolaters˺ call upon them for guidance, they cannot respond to you. it is all the same whether you call them or remain silent.
our word has already gone forth to our servants, the messengers,
when joseph’s brothers returned to their father, they pleaded, “o our father! we have been denied ˹further˺ supplies. so send our brother with us so that we may receive our measure, and we will definitely watch over him.”
and the soldiers of iblis, all together.
indeed, the believers, jews, sabians, and the polytheists—allah will judge between them ˹all˺ on judgment day. surely allah is a witness over all things.
and in your own creation, and whatever living beings he dispersed, are signs for people of sure faith.
as for the family of lot, we will certainly deliver them all,
allah only forbids you from befriending those who have fought you for ˹your˺ faith, driven you out of your homes, or supported ˹others˺ in doing so. and whoever takes them as friends, then it is they who are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers.
we only sent before you ˹o prophet˺ men inspired by us from among the people of each society. have the deniers not travelled through the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? and surely the ˹eternal˺ home of the hereafter is far better for those mindful ˹of allah˺. will you not then understand?
and built above you seven mighty ˹heavens˺,
but you cannot will ˹to do so˺, except by the will of allah, the lord of all worlds.
none would deny it except every evildoing transgressor.
and one of his signs is your sleep by night and by day ˹for rest˺ as well as your seeking his bounty ˹in both˺. surely in this are signs for people who listen.
those who stay at home—except those with valid excuses—are not equal to those who strive in the cause of allah with their wealth and their lives. allah has elevated in rank those who strive with their wealth and their lives above those who stay behind ˹with valid excuses˺. allah has promised each a fine reward, but those who strive will receive a far better reward than others—
never out of season nor forbidden—
the arrogant will say, “we are all in it! ˹for˺ allah has already passed judgment over ˹his˺ servants.”
and we certainly know that some of you will persist in denial,
blame is only on those who seek exemption from you although they have the means. they preferred to stay behind with the helpless, and allah has sealed their hearts so they do not realize ˹the consequences˺.
˹fiercely˺ driven away. and they will suffer an everlasting torment.
not at all! such a person will certainly be tossed into the crusher.
surely those who reject our signs, we will cast them into the fire. whenever their skin is burnt completely, we will replace it so they will ˹constantly˺ taste the punishment. indeed, allah is almighty, all-wise.
and do not crave what allah has given some of you over others. men will be rewarded according to their deeds and women ˹equally˺ according to theirs. rather, ask allah for his bounties. surely allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
he is the one who created you from a single soul, then from it made its spouse so he may find comfort in her. after he had been united with her, she carried a light burden that developed gradually. when it grew heavy, they prayed to allah, their lord, “if you grant us good offspring, we will certainly be grateful.”
there you will have abundant fruit to eat from.
he said, “i will pray to my lord for your forgiveness. he ˹alone˺ is indeed the all-forgiving, most merciful.”
and guided them to the straight path.
and the night as it conceals it!
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “if ˹all˺ humans and jinn were to come together to produce the equivalent of this quran, they could not produce its equal, no matter how they supported each other.”
we have certainly set forth every ˹kind of˺ lesson for people in this quran, so perhaps they will be mindful.
so we inspired him: “build the ark under our ˹watchful˺ eyes and directions. then when our command comes and the oven bursts ˹with water˺, take on board a pair from every species along with your family—except those against whom the decree ˹to drown˺ has already been passed. and do not plead with me for those who have done wrong, for they will surely be drowned.”
the decree ˹of torment˺ has already been justified against most of them, for they will never believe.
obey allah and his messenger and do not dispute with one another, or you would be discouraged and weakened. persevere! surely allah is with those who persevere.
say, “surely my lord hurls the truth ˹against falsehood˺. ˹he is˺ the knower of all unseen.”
he pleaded, “my lord! i have definitely wronged my soul, so forgive me.” so he forgave him, ˹for˺ he is indeed the all-forgiving, most merciful.
do people not see that we have created them from a sperm-drop, then—behold!—they openly challenge ˹us˺?
allah, your lord and the lord of your forefathers?”
remember your lord inwardly with humility and reverence and in a moderate tone of voice, both morning and evening. and do not be one of the heedless.
has he chosen daughters over sons?
those who avoid idle talk;
so we subjected to him the wind, blowing gently at his command to wherever he pleased.
those of you who die leaving widows should bequeath for them a year’s maintenance without forcing them out. but if they choose to leave, you are not accountable for what they reasonably decide for themselves. and allah is almighty, all-wise.
then he will return you to it, and then simply bring you forth ˹again˺.
say, “˹only˺ allah rescues you from this and any other distress, yet you associate others with him ˹in worship˺.”
˹they are˺ those who do not invoke any other god besides allah, nor take a ˹human˺ life—made sacred by allah—except with ˹legal˺ right, nor commit fornication. and whoever does ˹any of˺ this will face the penalty.
˹then he said to himself,˺ “by allah! i will surely plot against your idols after you have turned your backs and gone away.”
through which allah guides those who seek his pleasure to the ways of peace, brings them out of darkness and into light by his will, and guides them to the straight path.
why should we not put our trust in allah, when he has truly guided us to ˹the very best of˺ ways? indeed, we will patiently endure whatever harm you may cause us. and in allah let the faithful put their trust.”
they will be given a drink of sealed, pure wine,
and we have placed firm mountains upon the earth so it does not shake with them, and made in it broad pathways so they may find their way.
when they did, moses said, “what you have produced is mere magic, allah will surely make it useless, for allah certainly does not set right the work of the corruptors.
whoever comes to their lord as an evildoer will certainly have hell, where they can neither live nor die.
then when he saw the moon rising, he said, “this one is my lord!” but when it disappeared, he said, “if my lord does not guide me, i will certainly be one of the misguided people.”
so glorify allah in the evening and in the morning—
but when they saw it ˹devastated˺, they cried, “we must have lost ˹our˺ way!
no people can advance their doom, nor can they delay it.
as well as ˹silver˺ gates and thrones to recline on,
the ˹prophet’s˺ sight never wandered, nor did it overreach.
flames of fire and ˹molten˺ copper will be sent against you, and you will not be able to defend one another.
he has also caused you to take over their lands, homes, and wealth, as well as lands you have not yet set foot on. and allah is most capable of everything.
and ˹remember˺ when abraham raised the foundation of the house with ishmael, ˹both praying,˺ “our lord! accept ˹this˺ from us. you are indeed the all-hearing, all-knowing.
and argued, “should we really abandon our gods for a mad poet?”
indeed, we blessed luqman with wisdom, ˹saying˺, “be grateful to allah, for whoever is grateful, it is only for their own good. and whoever is ungrateful, then surely allah is self-sufficient, praiseworthy.”
obey allah and the messenger, so you may be shown mercy.
what if that ˹man˺ persists in denial and turns away?
you certainly cannot make the dead hear ˹the truth˺. nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and walk away.
then he ˹and the others˺ will look and spot him in the midst of the hellfire.
and even if we opened for them a gate to heaven, through which they continued to ascend,
o believers! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet, nor speak loudly to him as you do to one another, or your deeds will become void while you are unaware.
we inspired the mother of moses: “nurse him, but when you fear for him, put him then into the river, and do not fear or grieve. we will certainly return him to you, and make him one of the messengers.”
so he began to build the ark, and whenever some of the chiefs of his people passed by, they mocked him. he said, “if you laugh at us, we will ˹soon˺ laugh at you similarly.
thinking that their wealth will make them immortal!
they rejected ˹the truth˺ and followed their own desires—and every matter will be settled—
if you ˹meccans˺ persist in denial, so did ˹many˺ communities before you. the messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.”
their greeting on the day they meet him will be, “peace!” and he has prepared for them an honourable reward.
˹o prophet!˺ do not grieve for those who race to disbelieve—surely they will not harm allah in the least. it is allah’s will to disallow them a share in the hereafter, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment.
they will reply, “to allah!” say, “why are you not then mindful?”
˹it was later said,˺ “o john! hold firmly to the scriptures.” and we granted him wisdom while ˹he was still˺ a child,
surely this quran guides to what is most upright, and gives good news to the believers—who do good—that they will have a mighty reward.
and indeed, we adorned the lowest heaven with ˹stars like˺ lamps, and made them ˹as missiles˺ for stoning ˹eavesdropping˺ devils, for whom we have also prepared the torment of the blaze.
we gave them our signs, but they turned away from them.
moses pleaded, “my lord! i have no control over anyone except myself and my brother. so set us apart from the rebellious people.”
˹remember˺ when the well-trained, swift horses were paraded before him in the evening.
he replied, “did i not say that you cannot have patience with me?”
they say, “these cattle and crops are reserved—none may eat them except those we permit,” so they claim. some other cattle are exempted from labour and others are not slaughtered in allah’s name—falsely attributing lies to him. he will repay them for their lies.
so ask them ˹o prophet˺, which is harder to create: them or other marvels of our creation?
˹but˺ when the truth came to them, they said, “this is magic, and we totally reject it.”
and ˹in˺ the alternation of the day and the night, the provision sent down from the skies by allah—reviving the earth after its death—and the shifting of the winds, are signs for people of understanding.
do not eat of what is not slaughtered in allah’s name. for that would certainly be ˹an act of˺ disobedience. surely the devils whisper to their ˹human˺ associates to argue with you. if you were to obey them, then you ˹too˺ would be polytheists.
those we have given the book follow it as it should be followed. it is they who ˹truly˺ believe in it. as for those who reject it, it is they who are the losers.
and allah increases in guidance those who are ˹rightly˺ guided. and the everlasting good deeds are far better with your lord in reward and in outcome.
when they hear slanderous talk, they turn away from it, saying, “we are accountable for our deeds and you for yours. peace ˹is our only response˺ to you! we want nothing to do with those who act ignorantly.”
they replied, “o moses! there is an enormously powerful people there, so we will never ˹be able to˺ enter it until they leave. if they do, then we will enter!”
and as he made his way towards midian, he said, “i trust my lord will guide me to the right way.”
overwhelming the people. ˹they will cry,˺ “this is a painful torment.
say, ˹o prophet, that allah says,˺ “o my servants who have exceeded the limits against their souls! do not lose hope in allah’s mercy, for allah certainly forgives all sins. he is indeed the all-forgiving, most merciful.
then we revealed to you ˹o prophet, saying˺: “follow the faith of abraham, the upright, who was not one of the polytheists.”
and whoever repents and does good has truly turned to allah properly.
the followers will respond, “no! you are not welcome! you brought this upon us. what an evil place for settlement!”
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah, for he is the almighty, all-wise.
and a caller to ˹the way of˺ allah by his command, and a beacon of light.
and the one who has brought the truth and those who embrace it—it is they who are the righteous.
and it has indeed been ˹foretold˺ in the scriptures of those before.
if allah touches you with harm, none can undo it except him. and if he touches you with a blessing, he is most capable of everything.
and meticulously split the earth open ˹for sprouts˺,
had allah willed, he could have easily made you one community ˹of believers˺, but he leaves to stray whoever he wills and guides whoever he wills. and you will certainly be questioned about what you used to do.
and ˹remember˺ when we said to the angels, “prostrate before adam,” becoming unfaithful.
there is no moving creature on earth whose provision is not guaranteed by allah. and he knows where it lives and where it is laid to rest. all is ˹written˺ in a perfect record.
and fear the one who created you and ˹all˺ earlier peoples.”
then we delivered him, along with lot, to the land we had showered with blessings for all people.
as for the one who is charitable, mindful ˹of allah˺,
and warn ˹all, starting with˺ your closest relatives,
when it is said to them, “come to allah’s revelations and to the messenger,” they reply, “what we found our forefathers practicing is good enough for us.” ˹would they still do so,˺ even if their forefathers had absolutely no knowledge or guidance?
allah, there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. he will certainly gather ˹all of˺ you together on the day of judgment—about which there is no doubt. and whose word is more truthful than allah’s?
once they think they are self-sufficient.
and prostrate before him during part of the night,
and ˹remember˺ when moses said to his people, “o my people! remember allah’s favours upon you when he raised prophets from among you, made you sovereign,
now, if you are not subject to our will ˹as you claim˺,
both will be dark green.
at the seat of honour in the presence of the most powerful sovereign.
o believers! do not be like those who slandered moses, but allah cleared him of what they said. and he was honourable in the sight of allah.
indeed, those who persist in disbelief and hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah and from the sacred mosque we will cause them to taste a painful punishment.
˹this is˺ allah’s way, already long established ˹in the past˺. and you will find no change in allah’s way.
adding, “then such a return would be a ˹total˺ loss ˹for us˺!”
for them is punishment in this worldly life, but the punishment of the hereafter is truly far worse. and none can shield them from allah.
˹they say so even though˺ we had never given them any scriptures to study, nor did we ever send them a warner before you ˹o prophet˺.
o believers! indeed, some of your spouses and children are enemies to you, so beware of them. but if you pardon, overlook, and forgive ˹their faults˺, then allah is truly all-forgiving, most merciful.
when he truly created you in stages ˹of development˺?
on that day all will follow the caller ˹for assembly˺, ˹and˺ none will dare to deviate. all voices will be hushed before the most compassionate. only whispers will be heard.
a fate ˹already˺ sealed.
allah will respond, “be despised in there! do not ˹ever˺ plead with me ˹again˺!
they definitely ˹thought they˺ were about to lure you away from what we have revealed to you ˹o prophet˺, hoping that you would attribute something else to us falsely—and then they would have certainly taken you as a close friend.
it is not lawful for a believer to kill another except by mistake. and whoever kills a believer unintentionally must free a believing slave and pay blood-money to the victim’s family—unless they waive it charitably. but if the victim is a believer from a hostile people, then a believing slave must be freed. and if the victim is from a people bound with you in a treaty, then blood-money must be paid to the family along with freeing a believing slave. those who are unable, let them fast two consecutive months—as a means of repentance to allah. and allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
but they killed her, so he warned ˹them˺, “you have ˹only˺ three ˹more˺ days to enjoy life in your homes—this is an unfailing promise!”
as for those who disbelieve and reject our signs, they will be the residents of the hellfire.
so give them good news of a painful punishment.
and by the canopy raised ˹high˺!
o children of adam! dress properly whenever you are at worship. eat and drink, but do not waste. surely he does not like the wasteful.
then surely with us is their reckoning.
he is the one who smoothed out the earth for you, so move about in its regions and eat from his provisions. and to him is the resurrection ˹of all˺.
and in our sight they are truly among the chosen and the finest.
indeed, the example of jesus in the sight of allah is like that of adam. he created him from dust, then said to him, “be!” and he was!
in it are fruit, palm trees with date stalks,
whoever does an evil deed will only be paid back with its equivalent. and whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, they will enter paradise, where they will be provided for without limit.
on the day of judgment you will see those who lied about allah with their faces gloomy. is hell not a ˹fitting˺ home for the arrogant?
we already sent messengers before you. we have told you the stories of some of them, while others we have not. it was not for any messenger to bring a sign without allah’s permission. but when allah’s decree comes, judgment will be passed with fairness, and the people of falsehood will then be in ˹total˺ loss.
they asked, “was it you who did this to our gods, o abraham?”
how could i take besides him other gods whose intercession would not be of any benefit to me, nor could they save me if the most compassionate intended to harm me?
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people.”
and preferred the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world,
and do not let those who ˹greedily˺ withhold allah’s bounties think it is good for them—in fact, it is bad for them! they will be leashed ˹by their necks˺ on the day of judgment with whatever ˹wealth˺ they used to withhold. and allah is the ˹sole˺ inheritor of the heavens and the earth. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
or ˹is it because˺ they possess the treasuries of the mercy of your lord—the almighty, the giver ˹of all bounties˺.
they ˹later˺ sold him for a cheap price, just a few silver coins—only wanting to get rid of him.
every soul will taste death. and we test you ˹o humanity˺ with good and evil as a trial, then to us you will ˹all˺ be returned.
˹remember˺ when joseph said to his father, “o my dear father! indeed i dreamt of eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon—i saw them prostrating to me!”
then the idols will be hurled headlong into hell, along with the deviant
if only they could find a refuge, or a cave, or any hiding-place, they would rush headlong towards it.
the revelation of this book is from allah—the almighty, all-knowing,
it is they who will have the gardens of eternity, with rivers flowing under their feet. there they will be adorned with bracelets of gold, and wear green garments of fine silk and rich brocade, reclining there on ˹canopied˺ couches. what a marvellous reward! and what a fabulous place to rest!
a messenger of their own actually did come to them, but they denied him. so the torment overtook them while they persisted in wrongdoing.
˹he is the˺ knower of the seen and unseen. exalted is he above what they associate ˹with him˺.
moses reassured his people, “seek allah’s help and be patient. indeed, the earth belongs to allah ˹alone˺. he grants it to whoever he chooses of his servants. the ultimate outcome belongs ˹only˺ to the righteous.”
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. he creates whatever he wills. he blesses whoever he wills with daughters, and blesses whoever he wills with sons,
they carved their homes in the mountains, feeling secure.
there are some of them who ˹pretend to˺ listen to your recitation ˹of the quran˺, but we have cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to comprehend it—and deafness in their ears. even if they were to see every sign, they still would not believe in them. the disbelievers would ˹even˺ come to argue with you, saying, “this ˹quran˺ is nothing but ancient fables!”
which is better: those who laid the foundation of their building on the fear and pleasure of allah, or those who did so on the edge of a crumbling cliff that tumbled down with them into the fire of hell? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
and he will indeed have ˹a status of˺ closeness to us and an honourable destination!
and they argue, “there is nothing beyond our worldly life. we die; others are born. and nothing destroys us but ˹the passage of˺ time.” yet they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this ˹claim˺. they only speculate.
rather, seek the ˹reward˺ of the hereafter by means of what allah has granted you, without forgetting your share of this world. and be good ˹to others˺ as allah has been good to you. do not seek to spread corruption in the land, for allah certainly does not like the corruptors.”
and when the sky is stripped away,
and when they saw the faithful, they would say, “these ˹people˺ are truly astray,”
we have chosen some of those messengers above others. if allah had willed, succeeding generations would not have fought ˹among themselves˺ after receiving the clear proofs. but they differed—some believed while others disbelieved. yet if allah had willed, they would not have fought one another. but allah does what he wills.
those ˹idols˺ you invoke besides allah are created beings like yourselves. so call upon them and see if they will answer you, if your claims are true!
so that allah may forgive you for your past and future shortcomings, perfect his favour upon you, guide you along the straight path,
and he is the one who has made the stars as your guide through the darkness of land and sea. we have already made the signs clear for people who know.
and when they are told, “believe as others believe,” they reply, “will we believe as the fools believe?” indeed, it is they who are fools, but they do not know.
producing by it grain and ˹various˺ plants,
the parable of the deeds of those who disbelieve in their lord is that of ashes fiercely blown away by wind on a stormy day. they will gain nothing from what they have earned. that is ˹truly˺ the farthest one can stray.
surely in this is a sign. yet most of them would not believe.
so allah made them taste humiliation in this worldly life, but far worse is the punishment of the hereafter, if only they knew.
they turn others away from the prophet and distance themselves as well. they ruin none but themselves, yet they fail to perceive it.
who are in awe of their lord without seeing him, and are fearful of the hour.
who does more wrong than those who prevent allah’s name from being mentioned in his places of worship and strive to destroy them? such people have no right to enter these places except with fear. for them is disgrace in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment in the hereafter.
have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those who were ˹destroyed˺ before them? they were far superior in might and ˹richer in˺ monuments throughout the land, but their ˹worldly˺ gains were of no benefit to them.
in hell they will burn. what an evil place for settlement.
impossible, simply impossible is what you are promised!
many are the societies we have destroyed for persisting in wrongdoing, leaving them in total ruin. ˹many are˺ also the abandoned wells and lofty palaces!
it is the same whether you warn them or not—they will never believe.
obey allah and obey the messenger and beware! but if you turn away, then know that our messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.
o humanity! fear your lord, for the ˹violent˺ quaking at the hour is surely a dreadful thing.
the herald ˹along with the guards˺ replied, “we have lost the king’s measuring cup. and whoever brings it will be awarded a camel-load ˹of grain˺. i guarantee it.”
surely allah loves those who fight in his cause in ˹solid˺ ranks as if they were one concrete structure.
the command of allah is at hand, so do not hasten it. glorified and exalted is he above what they associate ˹with him in worship˺!
but give less when they measure or weigh for buyers.
and mention in the book ˹o prophet, the story of˺ ishmael. he was truly a man of his word, and was a messenger and a prophet.
but if they turn away, then say, ˹o prophet,˺ “allah is sufficient for me. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. in him i put my trust. and he is the lord of the mighty throne.”
he is the one who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons ˹their˺ sins. and he knows whatever you do.
and before ˹that he destroyed˺ the people of noah, who were truly far worse in wrongdoing and transgression.
o believers! take neither jews nor christians as guardians—they are guardians of each other. whoever does so will be counted as one of them. surely allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
and nothing has prevented people from believing when guidance comes to them except their protest: “has allah sent a human as a messenger?”
do they only await the fulfilment ˹of its warning˺? the day it will be fulfilled, those who ignored it before will say, “the messengers of our lord certainly came with the truth. are there any intercessors who can plead on our behalf? or can we be sent back so we may do ˹good,˺ unlike what we used to do?” they will have certainly ruined themselves, and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them.
o believers! always remember allah often,
who would then recite it to the deniers ˹in fluent arabic˺, still they would not have believed in it!
or do they say, “we are all ˹a˺ united ˹front˺, bound to prevail.”?
he knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them. and to allah ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺.
they will be waited on by eternal youths
indeed, we gave moses the book and sent after him successive messengers. and we gave jesus, son of mary, clear proofs and supported him with the holy spirit. why is it that every time a messenger comes to you ˹israelites˺ with something you do not like, you become arrogant, rejecting some and killing others?
if you are rejected by them, so too were messengers before you who came with clear proofs, divine books, and enlightening scriptures.
there is ˹security of˺ life for you in ˹the law of˺ retaliation, o people of reason, so that you may become mindful ˹of allah˺.
a declaration from allah and his messenger ˹is made˺ to all people on the day of the greater pilgrimage that allah and his messenger are free of the polytheists. so if you ˹pagans˺ repent, it will be better for you. but if you turn away, then know that you will have no escape from allah. and give good news ˹o prophet˺ to the disbelievers of a painful punishment.
then if we send a ˹harsh˺ wind which they see withering ˹their˺ crops, they will definitely deny ˹old favours˺ right after.
but it is not for you to tell its time.
so when the messengers came to the family of lot,
in both ˹gardens˺ will be maidens of modest gaze, who no human or jinn has ever touched before.
they will be stricken with disgrace wherever they go, unless they are protected by a covenant with allah or a treaty with the people. they have invited the displeasure of allah and have been branded with misery for rejecting allah’s revelations and murdering ˹his˺ prophets unjustly. this is ˹a fair reward˺ for their disobedience and violations.
he hides himself from the people because of the bad news he has received. should he keep her in disgrace, or bury her ˹alive˺ in the ground? evil indeed is their judgment!
and when your children reach the age of puberty, let them seek permission ˹to come in˺, as their seniors do. this is how allah makes his revelations clear to you, for allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
rather, worship allah ˹alone˺ and be one of the grateful.
and he ˹is the one who˺ will cause me to die, and then bring me back to life.
they declared, “o our fellow jinn! we have truly heard a scripture revealed after moses, confirming what came before it. it guides to the truth and the straight way.
so the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook them at sunrise.
tell them ˹o prophet˺, “imagine if his torment were to overcome you by night or day—do the wicked realize what they are ˹really˺ asking him to hasten?
say, “nothing will ever befall us except what allah has destined for us. he is our protector.” so in allah let the believers put their trust.
those who do not pay alms-tax and are in denial of the hereafter.
so, ˹continue to˺ remind ˹all, o prophet˺, for your duty is only to remind.
do not let those who rejoice in their misdeeds and love to take credit for what they have not done think they will escape torment. they will suffer a painful punishment.
and ˹various˺ crops, and palm trees ˹loaded˺ with tender fruit;
all praise is for allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. and praise be to him in the hereafter. he is the all-wise, all-aware.
do not let those disbelievers think they are not within reach. they will have no escape.
and before this ˹quran˺ the book of moses was ˹revealed as˺ a guide and mercy. and this book is a confirmation, in the arabic tongue, to warn those who do wrong, and as good news to those who do good.
so endure ˹this denial, o prophet,˺ with beautiful patience.
or do they have associate-gods ˹supporting this claim˺? then let them bring forth their associate-gods, if what they say is true.
o humanity! indeed, there has come to you a warning from your lord, a cure for what is in the hearts, a guide, and a mercy for the believers.
surely those who disbelieve, hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah, and then die as disbelievers; allah will never forgive them.
surely your lord gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills. he is certainly all-aware, all-seeing of his servants.
and so i have warned you of a raging fire,
then severed his aorta,
and in their wealth there was a rightful share ˹fulfilled˺ for the beggar and the poor.
how can they take protectors besides him? allah alone is the protector. he ˹alone˺ gives life to the dead. and he ˹alone˺ is most capable of everything.
and so, when they took him away and decided to throw him into the bottom of the well, we inspired him: “˹one day˺ you will remind them of this deed of theirs while they are unaware ˹of who you are˺.”
as if they had never lived there. surely thamûd denied their lord, so away with thamûd!
allah asked, “o iblis! what is the matter with you that you did not join others in prostration?”
so we gave him good news of a forbearing son.
still they persisted in defying the commands of their lord, so they were overtaken by a ˹mighty˺ blast while they were looking on.
so this day they will have no close friend here,
go, both of you, to pharaoh, for he has truly transgressed ˹all bounds˺.
˹it is˺ allah’s kindled fire,
so they rushed in their footsteps!
and so they will confess their sins. so away with the residents of the blaze!
they will have the home of peace with their lord, who will be their guardian because of what they used to do.
the magicians came to pharaoh, saying, “shall we receive a ˹suitable˺ reward if we prevail?”
are you afraid of spending in charity before your private consultations ˹with him˺? since you are unable to do so, and allah has turned to you in mercy, then ˹continue to˺ establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey allah and his messenger. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
that is the paradise which you will be awarded for what you used to do.
˹imagine˺ how many devotees fought along with their prophets and never faltered despite whatever ˹losses˺ they suffered in the cause of allah, nor did they weaken or give in! allah loves those who persevere.
for the disbelievers—to be averted by none—
was it not sufficient proof for the deniers that it has been recognized by the knowledgeable among the children of israel?
then after that will come a year in which people will receive abundant rain and they will press ˹oil and wine˺.”
yet they worship besides allah that for which he has sent down no authority, and of which they have no knowledge. the wrongdoers will have no helper.
he laid out the earth for all beings.
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. allah ˹alone˺ is truly the self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
do ˹such˺ people not remember that we created them before, when they were nothing?
it is allah who created you, then gives you provisions, then will cause you to die, and then will bring you back to life. can any of your associate-gods do any of this? glorified and exalted is he above what they associate with him ˹in worship˺!
or do they have gods—other than us—that can protect them? they cannot ˹even˺ protect themselves, nor will they be aided against us.
whenever our clear revelations are recited to them, you ˹o prophet˺ recognize rage on the faces of the disbelievers, as if they are going to snap at those who recite our revelations to them. say, “shall i inform you of something far more enraging than that? ˹it is˺ the fire with which allah has threatened those who disbelieve. what an evil destination!”
the jews and the christians each say, “we are the children of allah and his most beloved!” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “why then does he punish you for your sins? no! you are only humans like others of his own making. he forgives whoever he wills and punishes whoever he wills. to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between. and to him is the final return.”
had your lord so willed ˹o prophet˺, all ˹people˺ on earth would have certainly believed, every single one of them! would you then force people to become believers?
boasting of the sacred house, and babbling ˹nonsense about the quran˺ by night.”
there is nothing beyond our worldly life. we die, others are born, and none will be resurrected.
say, “if i had ever asked you for a reward, you could keep it. my reward is only from allah. and he is a witness over all things.”
do they not see that we singlehandedly created for them, among other things, cattle which are under their control?
this is the truth from your lord, so do not be one of those who doubt.
can those ˹believers˺ who stand on clear proof from their lord be like those whose evil deeds are made appealing to them and ˹only˺ follow their desires?
or do those who commit evil deeds ˹simply˺ think that we will make them equal—in their life and after their death—to those who believe and do good? how wrong is their judgment!
moses assured ˹him˺, “you will find me patient, allah willing, and i will not disobey any of your orders.”
we had ordered ˹them˺, “go to the people who would deny our signs.” then we annihilated the deniers entirely.
they are the ones who persisted in disbelief and hindered you from the sacred mosque, preventing the sacrificial animals from reaching their destination. had those ˹unknown˺ believers stood apart, we would have certainly inflicted a painful punishment on the disbelievers.
those we have given the scripture recognize this ˹prophet˺ as they recognize their own children. yet a group of them hides the truth knowingly.
bring me blocks of iron!” then, when he had filled up ˹the gap˺ between the two mountains, he ordered, “blow!” when the iron became red hot, he said, “bring me molten copper to pour over it.”
to allah ˹alone˺ bow down ˹in submission˺ all those in the heavens and the earth—willingly or unwillingly—as do their shadows, morning and evening.
as for elderly women past the age of marriage, there is no blame on them if they take off their ˹outer˺ garments, without revealing their adornments. but it is better for them if they avoid this ˹altogether˺. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
the path of allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. surely to allah all matters will return ˹for judgment˺.
indeed, those who defy allah and his messenger will be debased, just like those before them. we have certainly sent down clear revelations. and the disbelievers will suffer a humiliating punishment.
allah concluded, “the truth is—and i ˹only˺ say the truth—:
he answered, “our lord is the one who has given everything its ˹distinctive˺ form, then guided ˹it˺.”
it will debase ˹some˺ and elevate ˹others˺.
˹one day˺ he entered the city unnoticed by its people. there he found two men fighting: one of his own people, and the other of his enemies. the man from his people called to him for help against his foe. so moses punched him, causing his death. moses cried, “this is from satan’s handiwork. he is certainly a sworn, misleading enemy.”
and blessed is the one to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between! with him ˹alone˺ is the knowledge of the hour. and to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.
and ˹he is the one˺ who created all ˹things in˺ pairs, and made for you ships and animals to ride
so solomon smiled in amusement at her words, and prayed, “my lord! inspire me to ˹always˺ be thankful for your favours which you have blessed me and my parents with, and to do good deeds that please you. admit me, by your mercy, into ˹the company of˺ your righteous servants.”
it will ˹even˺ cause the sky to split apart. his promise ˹of judgment˺ must be fulfilled.
and construct castles, as if you are going to live forever,
then the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook them with justice, and we reduced them to rubble. so away with the wrongdoing people!
they are truly in doubt of the meeting with their lord! ˹but˺ he is indeed fully aware of everything.
˹eventually,˺ noah cried, “my lord! they have certainly persisted in disobeying me, and followed ˹instead˺ those ˹elite˺ whose ˹abundant˺ wealth and children only increase them in loss,
we are your supporters in this worldly life and in the hereafter. there you will have whatever your souls desire, and there you will have whatever you ask for:
so i do swear by the positions of the stars—
˹it is˺ the day they will be tormented over the fire.
˹it will be said to both,˺ “since you all did wrong, sharing in the punishment will be of no benefit to you this day.”
then, when the trumpet will be blown,
when they entered joseph’s presence, they pleaded, “o chief minister! we and our family have been touched with hardship, and we have brought only a few worthless coins, but ˹please˺ give us our supplies in full and be charitable to us. indeed, allah rewards the charitable.”
if it is difficult for someone to repay a debt, postpone it until a time of ease. and if you waive it as an act of charity, it will be better for you, if only you knew.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “a day has ˹already˺ been appointed for you, which you can neither delay nor advance by a ˹single˺ moment.”
how can that be a ‘favour,’ of which you remind me, when ˹it was only because˺ you ˹have˺ enslaved the children of israel?”
˹the day will come when˺ the disbelievers will certainly wish they had submitted ˹to allah˺.
when the night grew dark upon him, he saw a star and said, “this is my lord!” but when it set, he said, “i do not love things that set.”
they regard their acceptance of islam as a favour to you. tell ˹them, o prophet˺, “do not regard your islam as a favour to me. rather, it is allah who has done you a favour by guiding you to the faith, if ˹indeed˺ you are faithful.
so glorify the praises of your lord and be one of those who ˹always˺ pray,
the disbelievers from the people of the book and the polytheists would not want you to receive any blessing from your lord, but allah selects whoever he wills for his mercy. and allah is the lord of infinite bounty.
the god of humankind,
do people think they will be left without purpose?
those who say, “allah is one in a trinity,” have certainly fallen into disbelief. there is only one god. if they do not stop saying this, those who disbelieve among them will be afflicted with a painful punishment.
if you lend to allah a good loan, he will multiply it for you and forgive you. for allah is most appreciative, most forbearing.
they replied, “we will not cease to worship it until moses returns to us.”
only the attentive will respond ˹to your call˺. as for the dead, allah will raise them up, then to him they will ˹all˺ be returned.
then they will cry, “can we be allowed more time?”
surely allah will admit those who believe and do good into gardens under which rivers flow. as for the disbelievers, they enjoy themselves and feed like cattle. but the fire will be their home.
i do not say to you that i possess allah’s treasuries or know the unseen, nor do i claim to be an angel, nor do i say that allah will never grant goodness to those you look down upon. allah knows best what is ˹hidden˺ within them. ˹if i did,˺ then i would truly be one of the wrongdoers.”
that will ˹truly˺ be a difficult day—
the two bodies of water are not alike: one is fresh, palatable, and pleasant to drink and the other is salty and bitter. yet from them both you eat tender seafood and extract ornaments to wear. and you see the ships ploughing their way through both, so you may seek his bounty and give thanks ˹to him˺.
˹the angels said,˺ “o abraham! plead no more! your lord’s decree has already come, and they will certainly be afflicted with a punishment that cannot be averted!”
do not ˹o prophet˺ ever pray in it. certainly, a mosque founded on righteousness from the first day is more worthy of your prayers. in it are men who love to be purified. and allah loves those who purify themselves.
he later said, “i am leaving ˹in obedience˺ to my lord. he will guide me.
and put your hand under your armpit, it will come out ˹shining˺ white, unblemished, as another sign,
and who are ˹properly˺ observant of their prayers.
indeed, allah will admit those who believe and do good into gardens, under which rivers flow. surely allah does what he wills.
so he formed the heaven into seven heavens in two days, assigning to each its mandate. and we adorned the lowest heaven with ˹stars like˺ lamps ˹for beauty˺ and for protection. that is the design of the almighty, all-knowing.”
know that whatever spoils you take, one-fifth is for allah and the messenger, his close relatives, orphans, the poor, and ˹needy˺ travellers, if you ˹truly˺ believe in allah and what we revealed to our servant on that decisive day when the two armies met ˹at badr˺. and allah is most capable of everything.
then on the day of judgment you will ˹all settle your˺ dispute before your lord.
would that enjoyment be of any benefit to them ˹at all˺?
˹some among˺ the jews said, “allah is tight-fisted.” may their fists be tied and they be condemned for what they said. rather, he is open-handed, giving freely as he pleases. that which has been revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ from your lord will only cause many of them to increase in wickedness and disbelief. we have stirred among them hostility and hatred until the day of judgment. whenever they kindle the fire of war, allah puts it out. and they strive to spread corruption in the land. and allah does not like corruptors.
also, which ˹powerless˺ force will come to your help instead of the most compassionate? indeed, the disbelievers are only ˹lost˺ in delusion.
can the one who created the heavens and the earth not ˹easily˺ resurrect these ˹deniers˺?” yes ˹he can˺! for he is the master creator, all-knowing.
then their accommodation will be boiling water ˹to drink˺
blessed is the one who—if he wills—can give you far better than ˹all˺ that: gardens under which rivers flow, and palaces as well.
so be patient with your lord’s decree, for you are truly under our ˹watchful˺ eyes. and glorify the praises of your lord when you rise.
all praise is for him in the heavens and the earth—as well as in the afternoon, and at noon.
then most evil was the end of the evildoers for denying and mocking the signs of allah.
this is allah’s favour, and allah fully knows ˹who deserves it˺.
whoever turns away from it will surely bear the burden ˹of sin˺ on the day of judgment,
these are the ones who will be awarded
see then what the consequences of their plan were: we ˹utterly˺ destroyed them and their people all together.
say, “had allah willed, i would not have recited it to you, nor would he have made it known to you. i had lived my whole life among you before this ˹revelation˺. do you not understand?”
indeed, we sent messengers before you ˹o prophet˺ among the groups of early peoples,
o believers! fight the disbelievers around you and let them find firmness in you. and know that allah is with those mindful ˹of him˺.
to send upon them stones of ˹baked˺ clay,
should we then turn the ˹quranic˺ reminder away from you ˹simply˺ because you have been a transgressing people?
he is the one who made the sun a radiant source and the moon a reflected light, with precisely ordained phases, so that you may know the number of years and calculation ˹of time˺. allah did not create all this except for a purpose. he makes the signs clear for people of knowledge.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “consider this: whether allah causes me and those with me to die or shows us mercy, who will save the disbelievers from a painful punishment?”
and indeed, one of those who followed his way was abraham.
their lord gives them good news of his mercy, pleasure, and gardens with everlasting bliss,
so woe to those ˹hypocrites˺ who pray
indeed, those who believe and do good—they are the best of ˹all˺ beings.
that was because their messengers used to come to them with clear proofs, but they said ˹mockingly˺, “how can humans be our guides?” so they persisted in disbelief and turned away. and allah was not in need ˹of their faith˺. for allah is self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
he reigns supreme over his creation. and he is the all-wise, all-aware.
this is the commandment of allah, which he has revealed to you. and whoever is mindful of allah, he will absolve them of their sins and reward them immensely.
although they had utterly lost hope just before it was sent down to them.
and we have commanded people to ˹honour˺ their parents. their mothers bore them through hardship upon hardship, and their weaning takes two years. so be grateful to me and your parents. to me is the final return.
a servant ˹of ours˺ from praying?
then they will turn to one another inquisitively.
but they rejected him, so we saved him and those with him in the ark, and drowned those who rejected our signs. they were certainly a blind people.
have we not given them two eyes,
whoever desires ˹only˺ this worldly life and its luxuries, we will pay them in full for their deeds in this life—nothing will be left out.
they will say, “glory be to you! our loyalty is to you, not them. in fact, they ˹only˺ followed the ˹temptations of evil˺ jinn, in whom most of them had faith.”
in the gardens of bliss,
˹again they were told,˺ “taste now my punishment and warnings!”
allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills. and the disbelievers become prideful of ˹the pleasures of˺ this worldly life. but the life of this world, compared to the hereafter, is nothing but a fleeting enjoyment.
have they not ever given it a thought? their fellow man is not insane. he is only sent with a clear warning.
all praise is for allah who has blessed me with ishmael and isaac in my old age. my lord is indeed the hearer of ˹all˺ prayers.
o my people! enter the holy land which allah has destined for you ˹to enter˺. and do not turn back or else you will become losers.”
let there be no compulsion in religion, for the truth stands out clearly from falsehood. so whoever renounces false gods and believes in allah has certainly grasped the firmest, unfailing hand-hold. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
but we ˹later˺ raised ˹several˺ generations, and the ages took their toll on them. nor were you living among the people of midian, rehearsing our revelations with them. but it is we who have sent ˹this revelation to you˺.
surely allah is with those who shun evil and who do good ˹deeds˺.
they had already pledged to allah earlier never to turn their backs ˹in retreat˺. and a pledge to allah must be answered for.
how can such polytheists have a treaty with allah and his messenger, except those you have made a treaty with at the sacred mosque? so, as long as they are true to you, be true to them. indeed allah loves those who are mindful ˹of him˺.
moses chose seventy men from among his people for our appointment and, when they were seized by an earthquake, he cried, “my lord! had you willed, you could have destroyed them long ago, and me as well. will you destroy us for what the foolish among us have done? this is only a test from you—by which you allow whoever you will to stray and guide whoever you will. you are our guardian. so forgive us and have mercy on us. you are the best forgiver.
˹commanding,˺ “go to pharaoh, for he has truly transgressed ˹all bounds˺.
˹how horrible will it be˺ when the heavens will split apart, becoming rose-red like ˹burnt˺ oil!
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal.
indeed, we have sent down to you clear revelations, along with examples of those who had gone before you, and a lesson to the god-fearing.
as for those who believed and did good, their lord will admit them into his mercy. that is ˹truly˺ the absolute triumph.
and to warn those who claim, “allah has offspring.”
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and whatever is in between and whatever is underground.
indeed, those who lower their voices in the presence of allah’s messenger are the ones whose hearts allah has refined for righteousness. they will have forgiveness and a great reward.
˹this quran is˺ profound ˹in˺ wisdom, but warnings are of no benefit ˹to them˺.
treasures, and splendid residences.
because of that, you ˹o prophet˺ will invite ˹all˺. be steadfast as you are commanded, and do not follow their desires. and say, “i believe in every scripture allah has revealed. and i am commanded to judge fairly among you. allah is our lord and your lord. we will be accountable for our deeds and you for yours. there is no ˹need for˺ contention between us. allah will gather us together ˹for judgment˺. and to him is the final return.”
to allah ˹alone˺ belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. and allah is almighty, all-wise.
so the pleas of intercessors will be of no benefit to them.
˹remember, o prophet,˺ when allah showed them in your dream as few in number. had he shown them to you as many, you ˹believers˺ would have certainly faltered and disputed in the matter. but allah spared you ˹from that˺. surely he knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
they used to sleep only little in the night,
˹they will be told,˺ “eat and drink joyfully for what you did in the days gone by.”
some others have confessed their wrongdoing: they have mixed goodness with evil. it is right to hope that allah will turn to them in mercy. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
they used to ask ˹mockingly˺, “when we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected?
those of you who ˹sinfully˺ divorce their wives by comparing them to their mothers ˹should know that˺ their wives are in no way their mothers. none can be their mothers except those who gave birth to them. what they say is certainly detestable and false. yet allah is truly ever-pardoning, all-forgiving.
then whoever still fabricates lies about allah, they will be the ˹true˺ wrongdoers.
he has made me a blessing wherever i go, and bid me to establish prayer and give alms-tax as long as i live,
if you ˹o prophet˺ are in doubt about ˹these stories˺ that we have revealed to you, then ask those who read the scripture before you. the truth has certainly come to you from your lord, so do not be one of those who doubt,
it is not appropriate for someone who allah has blessed with the scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to say to people, “worship me instead of allah.” rather, he would say, “be devoted to the worship of your lord ˹alone˺”—in accordance with what these prophets read in the scripture and what they taught.
they ˹instead˺ followed the magic promoted by the devils during the reign of solomon. never did solomon disbelieve, rather the devils disbelieved. they taught magic to the people, along with what had been revealed to the two angels, harût and marût, in babylon. the two angels never taught anyone without saying, “we are only a test ˹for you˺, so do not abandon ˹your˺ faith.” yet people learned ˹magic˺ that caused a rift ˹even˺ between husband and wife; although their magic could not harm anyone except by allah’s will. they learned what harmed them and did not benefit them—although they already knew that whoever buys into magic would have no share in the hereafter. miserable indeed was the price for which they sold their souls, if only they knew!
their reward is forgiveness from their lord and gardens under which rivers flow, staying there forever. how excellent is the reward for those who work ˹righteousness˺!
he turned away from them, lamenting, “alas, poor joseph!” and his eyes turned white out of the grief he suppressed.
and rise at ˹the last˺ part of the night, offering additional prayers, so your lord may raise you to a station of praise.
peace be upon me the day i was born, the day i die, and the day i will be raised back to life!”
and is not to be taken lightly.
˹it will be said to them,˺ “enter in peace and security.”
also remember ishmael, elisha, and ⱬul-kifl. all are among the best.
around her neck will be a rope of palm-fibre.
indeed, the righteous will be in a secure place,
we will call the wardens of hell.
guard yourselves against the fire prepared for the disbelievers.
still the pagans have made some of his creation out to be a part of him. indeed, humankind is clearly ungrateful.
but if we give them a taste of prosperity after being touched with adversity, they say, “my ills are gone,” and become totally prideful and boastful,
˹remember, o prophet˺ when your lord said to the angels, “i am going to create a human being from sounding clay moulded from black mud.
had their city been sacked from all sides and they had been asked to abandon faith, they would have done so with little hesitation.
o our fellow jinn! respond to the caller of allah and believe in him, he will forgive your sins and protect you from a painful punishment.
how will allah guide a people who chose to disbelieve after they had believed, acknowledged the messenger to be true, and received clear proofs? for allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
as a mercy from your lord. he ˹alone˺ is truly the all-hearing, all-knowing—
in heaven is your sustenance and whatever you are promised.
˹they are˺ like satan when he lures someone to disbelieve. then after they have done so, he will say ˹on judgment day˺, “i have absolutely nothing to do with you. i truly fear allah—the lord of all worlds.”
˹remember˺ when they said ˹to one another˺, “surely joseph and his brother ˹benjamin˺ are more beloved to our father than we, even though we are a group of so many. indeed, our father is clearly mistaken.
in a clear arabic tongue.
we have not taught him poetry, nor is it fitting for him. this ˹book˺ is only a reminder and a clear quran
do you not see that to allah bow down ˹in submission˺ all those in the heavens and all those on the earth, as well as the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, and ˹all˺ living beings, as well as many humans, while many are deserving of punishment. and whoever allah disgraces, none can honour. surely allah does what he wills.
these are the verses of the clear book.
a spring from which those nearest ˹to allah˺ will drink.
like the fate of the people of noah, ’ȃd, thamûd, and those after them. for allah would never will to wrong ˹his˺ servants.
moses prayed, “my lord! forgive me and my brother! and admit us into your mercy. you are the most merciful of the merciful.”
so when you meet the disbelievers ˹in battle˺, strike ˹their˺ necks until you have thoroughly subdued them, then bind them firmly. later ˹free them either as˺ an act of grace or by ransom until the war comes to an end. so will it be. had allah willed, he ˹himself˺ could have inflicted punishment on them. but he does ˹this only to˺ test some of you by means of others. and those who are martyred in the cause of allah, he will never render their deeds void.
and we blessed david with solomon—what an excellent servant ˹he was˺! indeed, he ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to allah˺.
have they failed to look at the earth, ˹to see˺ how many types of fine plants we have caused to grow in it?
they will have a known provision:
moses responded, “my lord knows best who has come with ˹true˺ guidance from him and will fare best in the end. indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed.”
enter the gates of hell, to stay there forever. what an evil home for the arrogant!”
if they turn away, then surely allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the corruptors.
he said, “o my people! do you have more regard for my clan than for allah, turning your back on him entirely? surely my lord is fully aware of what you do.
you are not ˹there˺ to compel them ˹to believe˺.
they said, “o moses! either you cast, or let us be the first to cast.”
do you not see that allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? if three converse privately, he is their fourth. if five, he is their sixth. whether fewer or more, he is with them wherever they may be. then, on the day of judgment, he will inform them of what they have done. surely allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
allah has made the ka’bah—the sacred house—a sanctuary of well-being for all people, along with the sacred months, the sacrificial animals, and the ˹offerings decorated with˺ garlands. all this so you may know that allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and that he has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of everything.
allah makes the believers steadfast with the firm word ˹of faith˺ in this worldly life and the hereafter. and allah leaves the wrongdoers to stray. for allah does what he wills.
they responded, “are you astonished by allah’s decree? may allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you, o people of this house. indeed, he is praiseworthy, all-glorious.”
on that day the inevitable event will have come to pass.
are they waiting for ˹anything˺ except the same torments that befell those before them? say, “keep waiting then! i too am waiting with you.”
say, “keep waiting! i too am waiting with you.”
and so moses became fearful, watching out in the city, when suddenly the one who sought his help the day before cried out to him again for help. moses rebuked him, “indeed, you are clearly a trouble-maker.”
they reassured ˹him˺, “do not be afraid! surely we give you good news of a knowledgeable son.”
nor say, ‘it was our forefathers who had associated others ˹with allah in worship˺ and we, as their descendants, followed in their footsteps. will you then destroy us for the falsehood they invented?’”
have you not seen how those who dispute allah’s signs are turned away?
then this is ˹truly˺ a biased distribution!
the building which they erected will never cease to fuel hypocrisy in their hearts until their hearts are torn apart. and allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
so when the stars are put out,
and ˹if˺ they ask you ˹o prophet˺ about the mountains, ˹then˺ say, “my lord will wipe them out completely,
indeed, we granted moses and aaron the standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺—a light and a reminder for the righteous,
then, when he came to them with the truth from us, they said, “kill the sons of those who believe with him and keep their women.” but the plotting of the disbelievers was only in vain.
some of them will ˹eventually˺ believe in it; others will not. and your lord knows best the corruptors.
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the scriptures? yet when they are invited to the book of allah to settle their disputes, some of them turn away heedlessly.
˹imagine˺ how many societies we have destroyed! our torment took them by surprise ˹while sleeping˺ at night or midday.
on that day you will see the wicked bound together in chains,
yet they are not all alike: there are some among the people of the book who are upright, who recite allah’s revelations throughout the night, prostrating ˹in prayer˺.
they ask you ˹o prophet in˺ what ˹way˺ they should donate. say, “whatever donations you give are for parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, and ˹needy˺ travellers. whatever good you do is certainly well known to allah.”
there is no activity you may be engaged in ˹o prophet˺ or portion of the quran you may be reciting, nor any deed you ˹all˺ may be doing except that we are a witness over you while doing it. not ˹even˺ an atom’s weight is hidden from your lord on earth or in heaven; nor anything smaller or larger than that, but is ˹written˺ in a perfect record.
when their brother lot said to them, “will you not fear ˹allah˺?
˹consider˺ the day he will gather you ˹all˺ for the day of gathering—that will be the day of mutual loss and gain. so whoever believes in allah and does good, he will absolve them of their sins and admit them into gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. that is the ultimate triumph.
indeed, allah chose adam, noah, the family of abraham, and the family of ’imran above all people ˹of their time˺.
those who believe and do good will surely be admitted by us into ˹the company of˺ the righteous.
is there a sickness in their hearts? or are they in doubt? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them? in fact, it is they who are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers.
and whenever it was said ˹to you˺, ‘surely allah’s promise ˹of judgment˺ is true and there is no doubt about the hour,’ you said ˹mockingly˺, ‘we do not know what the hour is! we think it is no more than speculation, and we are not convinced ˹that it will ever come˺.’”
then when moses was about to lay his hands on their foe, the enemy said, “o moses! do you intend to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? you only want to be a tyrant in the land. you do not intend to make peace!”
he ˹also˺ subjected for you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth—all by his grace. surely in this are signs for people who reflect.
surely your lord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then established himself on the throne, conducting every affair. none can intercede except by his permission. that is allah—your lord, so worship him ˹alone˺. will you not then be mindful?
surely we established him in the land, and gave him the means to all things.
and they argue, “had the most compassionate willed, we would have never worshipped them.” they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this ˹claim˺. they do nothing but lie.
and so will your lord choose you ˹o joseph˺, and teach you the interpretation of dreams, and perfect his favour upon you and the descendants of jacob—˹just˺ as he once perfected it upon your forefathers, abraham and isaac. surely your lord is all-knowing, all-wise.”
only saying what they never do?
allah will say, “enter the fire along with the ˹evil˺ groups of jinn and humans that preceded you.” whenever a group enters hell, it will curse the preceding one until they are all gathered inside, the followers will say about their leaders, “our lord! they have misled us, so multiply their torment in the fire.” he will answer, “it has already been multiplied for all, but you do not know.”
they ˹still˺ think that the enemy alliance has not ˹yet˺ withdrawn. and if the allies were to come ˹again˺, the hypocrites would wish to be away in the desert among nomadic arabs, ˹only˺ asking for news about you ˹believers˺. and if the hypocrites were in your midst, they would hardly take part in the fight.
by the night when it covers,
indeed, humankind was created impatient:
you cause the night to pass into the day and the day into the night. you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. and you provide for whoever you will without limit.”
and the foremost ˹in faith˺ will be the foremost ˹in paradise˺.
they have certainly denied ˹the truth˺, so they will soon face the consequences of their ridicule.
˹and˺ by the heavens in their marvellous design!
has the reminder been revealed ˹only˺ to him out of ˹all of˺ us?” in fact, they are ˹only˺ in doubt of my ˹revealed˺ reminder. in fact, ˹they do so because˺ they have not yet tasted my punishment.
and their wealth will be of no benefit to them when they tumble ˹into hell˺.
and in ˹the story of˺ ’ad ˹was another lesson,˺ when we sent against them the devastating wind.
the disbelievers ask, “when we and our fathers are reduced to dust, will we really be brought forth ˹alive˺?
they swear by allah to you ˹believers˺ in order to please you, while it is the pleasure of allah and his messenger they should seek, if they are ˹true˺ believers.
for whenever it was said to them ˹in the world˺, “there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except allah,” they acted arrogantly
why then have no golden bracelets ˹of kingship˺ been granted to him or angels come with him as escorts!”
the messenger prayed, “my lord! help me, because they have denied ˹me˺.”
and allah judges with the truth, while those ˹idols˺ they invoke besides him cannot judge at all. indeed, allah ˹alone˺ is the all-hearing, all-seeing.
on the day allah resurrects them all, they will ˹falsely˺ swear to him as they swear to you, thinking they have something to stand on. indeed, it is they who are the ˹total˺ liars.
so bear with the disbelievers ˹o prophet˺. let them be for ˹just˺ a little while.
˹o prophet!˺ tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their chastity. that is purer for them. surely allah is all-aware of what they do.
and say, “all praise is for allah! he will show you his signs, and you will recognize them. and your lord is never unaware of what you do.”
when my servants ask you ˹o prophet˺ about me: i am truly near. i respond to one’s prayer when they call upon me. so let them respond ˹with obedience˺ to me and believe in me, perhaps they will be guided ˹to the right way˺.
˹it will be said,˺ “seize and shackle them,
and they ˹even˺ assign to those ˹idols˺—who know nothing—a share of what we have provided for them. by allah! you will certainly be questioned about whatever ˹lies˺ you used to fabricate ˹against allah˺.
but no! those ˹gods˺ will deny their worship and turn against them.
the ˹true˺ believers are only those who believe in allah and his messenger, and when they are with him on a public matter, they do not leave without his permission. indeed, those who ask your permission ˹o prophet˺ are the ones who ˹truly˺ believe in allah and his messenger. so when they ask your permission for a private matter, grant permission to whoever you wish and ask allah’s forgiveness for them. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
this was the argument we gave abraham against his people. we elevate in rank whoever we please. surely your lord is all-wise, all-knowing.
˹later,˺ abraham asked, “what is your mission, o messengers?”
from a sperm-drop when it is emitted.
yet when allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who disbelieve in the hereafter are filled with disgust. but as soon as those ˹gods˺ other than him are mentioned, they are filled with joy.
they will ˹then˺ cry, “we do ˹now˺ believe in it ˹all˺.” but how could they ˹possibly˺ attain faith from a place so far-off ˹from the world˺,
although they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this. they follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions. and surely assumptions can in no way replace the truth.
he would have certainly remained in its belly until the day of resurrection.
do you not see that allah sends down rain from the sky, then the earth becomes green? surely allah is most subtle, all-aware.
my lord! they have caused many people to go astray. so whoever follows me is with me, and whoever disobeys me—then surely you are ˹still˺ all-forgiving, most merciful.
but if you must turn them down ˹because you lack the means to give˺—while hoping to receive your lord’s bounty—then ˹at least˺ give them a kind word.
and i will confirm the torah revealed before me and legalize some of what had been forbidden to you. i have come to you with a sign from your lord, so be mindful of allah and obey me.
and the man who believed cautioned, “o my people! i truly fear for you the doom of ˹earlier˺ enemy forces—
when they see you ˹o prophet˺, they only make fun of you, ˹saying,˺ “is this the one that allah has sent as a messenger?
allah said, “o adam! inform them of their names.” then when adam did, allah said, “did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and i know what you reveal and what you conceal?”
that is so. and whoever honours the rituals of allah, it is best for them in the sight of their lord. the ˹meat of˺ cattle has been made lawful for you, except what has ˹already˺ been recited to you. so shun the impurity of idolatry, and shun words of falsehood.
those who swear not to have intercourse with their wives must wait for four months. if they change their mind, then allah is certainly all-forgiving, most merciful.
ask them ˹o prophet˺ which of them can guarantee all that.
when we heard the guidance ˹of the quran˺, we ˹readily˺ believed in it. for whoever believes in their lord will have no fear of being denied ˹a reward˺ or wronged.
have they not seen how allah originates the creation then resurrects it? that is certainly easy for allah.
we sent them two messengers, but they rejected both. so we reinforced ˹the two˺ with a third, and they declared, “we have indeed been sent to you ˹as messengers˺.”
does every one of them expect to be admitted into a garden of bliss?
and the man who believed urged, “o my people! follow me, ˹and˺ i will lead you to the way of guidance.
are they waiting for the hour to take them by surprise when they least expect ˹it˺?
˹those˺ who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and have sure faith in the hereafter.
those who guard their chastity
the arrogant will respond to the lowly, “did we ever hinder you from guidance after it came to you? in fact, you were wicked ˹on your own˺.”
and ˹remember˺ when the angels said, “o mary! surely allah has selected you, purified you, and chosen you over all women of the world.
if you find no one at home, do not enter it until you have been given permission. and if you are asked to leave, then leave. that is purer for you. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of what you do.
enough! surely this ˹quran˺ is a reminder.
˹allah has created˺ four pairs: a pair of sheep and a pair of goats—ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “has he forbidden ˹to you˺ the two males or the two females or what is in the wombs of the two females? tell me with knowledge, if what you say is true.”—
they will say, “glory be to you! it was not right for ˹others like˺ us to take any lords besides you, but you allowed enjoyment for them and their forefathers ˹for so long˺ that they forgot ˹your˺ remembrance and became a doomed people.”
the residents of the fire will then cry out to the residents of paradise, “aid us with some water or any provision allah has granted you.” they will reply, “allah has forbidden both to the disbelievers,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “whoever is ˹entrenched˺ in misguidance, the most compassionate will allow them plenty of time, until—behold!—they face what they are threatened with: either the torment or the hour. only then will they realize who is worse in position and inferior in manpower.”
do not let your eyes crave the ˹fleeting˺ pleasures we have provided for some of the disbelievers, nor grieve for them. and be gracious to the believers.
indeed, this ˹quran˺ is the recitation of a noble messenger.
and it is truly a guide and mercy for the believers.
and keep in mind that allah’s messenger is ˹still˺ in your midst. if he were to yield to you in many matters, you would surely suffer ˹the consequences˺. but allah has endeared faith to you, making it appealing in your hearts. and he has made disbelief, rebelliousness, and disobedience detestable to you. those are the ones rightly guided.
i follow the faith of my fathers: abraham, isaac, and jacob. it is not ˹right˺ for us to associate anything with allah ˹in worship˺. this is part of allah’s grace upon us and humanity, but most people are not grateful.
in the absence of moses, his people made from their ˹golden˺ jewellery an idol of a calf that made a lowing sound. did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them to the ˹right˺ path? still they took it as a god and were wrongdoers.
he will ˹then˺ ask, “would you care to see ˹his fate˺?”
when the sky bursts open,
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “allah knows best how long they stayed. with him ˹alone˺ is ˹the knowledge of˺ the unseen of the heavens and the earth. how perfectly he hears and sees! they have no guardian besides him, and he shares his command with none.”
that was truly a revealing test.
whenever a sign comes to them from their lord, they turn away from it.
you ˹o prophet˺ could not read any writing ˹even˺ before this ˹revelation˺, nor could you write at all. otherwise, the people of falsehood would have been suspicious.
and those who believe and do good, we will soon admit them into gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. allah’s promise is ˹always˺ true. and whose word is more truthful than allah’s?
indeed, allah is the knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. he surely knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
as for the bright-faced, they will be in allah’s mercy, where they will remain forever.
we will cast horror into the hearts of the disbelievers for associating ˹false gods˺ with allah—a practice he has never authorized. the fire will be their home—what an evil place for the wrongdoers to stay!
they thought there would be no consequences, so they turned a blind eye and a deaf ear. yet allah turned to them in forgiveness ˹after their repentance˺, but again many became blind and deaf. and allah is all-seeing of what they do.
who has fed them against hunger and made them secure against fear.
˹it will be said,˺ “were my revelations not recited to you, but you used to deny them?”
those who do not expect to meet us say, “if only the angels were sent down to us, or we could see our lord!” they have certainly been carried away by their arrogance and have entirely exceeded all limits.
and when the hellfire is fiercely flared up,
you are already aware of those of you who broke the sabbath. we said to them, “be disgraced apes!”
indeed, the worst of all beings in the sight of allah are the ˹wilfully˺ deaf and dumb, who do not understand.
moses responded, “that is ˹exactly˺ what we were looking for.” so they returned, retracing their footsteps.
indeed, we have destined many jinn and humans for hell. they have hearts they do not understand with, eyes they do not see with, and ears they do not hear with. they are like cattle. in fact, they are even less guided! such ˹people˺ are ˹entirely˺ heedless.
so the magicians fell down, prostrating.
but as for me: he is allah, my lord, and i will never associate anyone with my lord ˹in worship˺.
and caused a squash plant to grow over him.
who will be in gardens, asking one another
they begged, “o our father! pray for the forgiveness of our sins. we have certainly been sinful.”
she wondered, “how can i have a son when no man has ever touched me, nor am i unchaste?”
and the record ˹of deeds˺ will be laid ˹open˺, and you will see the wicked in fear of what is ˹written˺ in it. they will cry, “woe to us! what kind of record is this that does not leave any sin, small or large, unlisted?” they will find whatever they did present ˹before them˺. and your lord will never wrong anyone.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i advise you to do ˹only˺ one thing: stand up for ˹the sake of˺ allah—individually or in pairs—then reflect. your fellow man is not insane. he is only a warner to you before ˹the coming of˺ a severe punishment.”
those who amuse themselves with falsehood!
the garden’s shade will be right above them, and its fruit will be made very easy to reach.
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. and he knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. for allah knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
for those who disbelieve and hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah, we will add more punishment to their punishment for all the corruption they spread.
except those ˹destined˺ to burn in hell.
and we have already seized them with torment, but they never humbled themselves to their lord, nor did they ˹submissively˺ appeal ˹to him˺.
for every community we appointed a rite of sacrifice so that they may pronounce the name of allah over the sacrificial animals he has provided for them. for your god is only one god, so submit yourselves to him ˹alone˺. and give good news ˹o prophet˺ to the humble:
who created and ˹perfectly˺ fashioned ˹all˺,
fight in the cause of allah, and know that allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
these ˹pagans˺ are awaiting nothing but a single blast that cannot be stopped.
surely in this are signs for those who contemplate.
on the day he will call you, you will ˹instantly˺ respond by praising him, thinking you had remained ˹in the world˺ only for a little while.
we will have you recite ˹the quran, o prophet,˺ so you will not forget ˹any of it˺,
upon the straight path.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. indeed, we have commanded those given the scripture before you, as well as you, to be mindful of allah. but if you disobey, then ˹know that˺ to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. and allah is self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
we built the universe with ˹great˺ might, and we are certainly expanding ˹it˺.
those who consume interest will stand ˹on judgment day˺ like those driven to madness by satan’s touch. that is because they say, “trade is no different than interest.” but allah has permitted trading and forbidden interest. whoever refrains—after having received warning from their lord—may keep their previous gains, and their case is left to allah. as for those who persist, it is they who will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.
and full-bosomed maidens of equal age,
o humanity! if you are in doubt about the resurrection, then ˹know that˺ we did create you—in order to demonstrate ˹our power˺ to you. ˹then˺ we settle whatever ˹embryo˺ we will in the womb for an appointed term, then bring you forth as infants, so that you may reach your prime. some of you ˹may˺ die ˹young˺, while others are left to reach the most feeble stage of life so that they may know nothing after having known much. and you see the earth lifeless, but as soon as we send down rain upon it, it begins to stir ˹to life˺ and swell, producing every type of pleasant plant.
then they will not be able to make a ˹last˺ will, nor can they return to their own people.
that is from the stories of the unseen which we reveal to you ˹o prophet˺. you were not present when they ˹all˺ made up their minds, and when they plotted ˹against joseph˺.
we will facilitate for them the way of ease.
whenever one of them is given the good news of what they attribute to the most compassionate, his face grows gloomy, as he suppresses his rage.
˹there will be retaliation in˺ a sacred month for ˹an offence in˺ a sacred month, and all violations will bring about retaliation. so, if anyone attacks you, retaliate in the same manner. ˹but˺ be mindful of allah, and know that allah is with those mindful ˹of him˺.
they said, “once we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected?
has the revelation been sent down ˹only˺ to him out of ˹all of˺ us? in fact, he is a boastful liar.”
or did you witness when death came to jacob? he asked his children, “who will you worship after my passing?” they replied, “we will ˹continue to˺ worship your god, the god of your forefathers—abraham, ishmael, and isaac—the one god. and to him we ˹all˺ submit.”
since you have distanced yourselves from them and what they worship besides allah, take refuge in the cave. your lord will extend his mercy to you and accommodate you in your ordeal.”
and if you divorce them before consummating the marriage but after deciding on a dowry, pay half of the dowry, unless the wife graciously waives it or the husband graciously pays in full. graciousness is closer to righteousness. and do not forget kindness among yourselves. surely allah is all-seeing of what you do.
whether you speak secretly or openly—he surely knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
until he reached the rising ˹point˺ of the sun. he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “sufficient is allah as a witness between me and you. he ˹fully˺ knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. and those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in allah, it is they who are the ˹true˺ losers.”
and the next life is certainly far better for you than this one.
they will have no protectors to help them against allah. and whoever allah leaves to stray, for them there is no way.
so the magicians were assembled at the set time on the appointed day.
˹o believers!˺ always turn to him ˹in repentance˺, be mindful of him, and establish prayers. and do not be polytheists—
yet cain convinced himself to kill his brother, so he killed him—becoming a loser.
indeed, we sent noah to his people ˹saying to him˺, “warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them.”
besides allah? can they help you or even help themselves?”
allah replied, “then this land is forbidden to them for forty years, during which they will wander through the land. so do not grieve for the rebellious people.”
surely we will be sufficient for you against the mockers,
to the jews, we have forbidden what we related to you before. we did not wrong them, but it was they who wronged themselves.
˹why˺ do you build a landmark on every high place in vanity,
so those who believe and do good will have forgiveness and an honourable provision.
˹but˺ woe on that day to the deniers!
and they will have no escape from it.
and ˹surely˺ your lord will give so much to you that you will be pleased.
then he drew his hand ˹out of his collar˺ and it was ˹shining˺ white for all to see.
to pharaoh, haman, and korah. but they responded: “magician! total liar!”
allah is the creator of all things, and he is the maintainer of everything.
surely this is a reminder. so let whoever wills take the ˹right˺ way to their lord.
and mention in the book ˹o prophet, the story of˺ mary when she withdrew from her family to a place in the east,
give to close relatives their due, as well as the poor and ˹needy˺ travellers. and do not spend wastefully.
but the chiefs of his people said, “we surely see that you are clearly misguided.”
indeed, he fully knows them and has counted them precisely.
when we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected?
whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded tenfold. but whoever comes with a bad deed will be punished for only one. none will be wronged.
but as for those with sickness in their hearts, it has increased them only in wickedness upon their wickedness, and they die as disbelievers.
who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against allah or deny his signs? indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed.
indeed, those who believed then disbelieved, then believed and again disbelieved—˹only˺ increasing in disbelief—allah will neither forgive them nor guide them to the ˹right˺ way.
he is the one who sent down serenity upon the hearts of the believers so that they may increase even more in their faith. to allah ˹alone˺ belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. and allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
he is the one who shows you lightning, inspiring ˹you with˺ hope and fear, and produces heavy clouds.
to bring you every skilled magician.”
when we inspired your mother with this:
we can surely meet you with similar magic. so set for us an appointment that neither of us will fail to keep, in a central place.”
he then proclaimed, “i am truly in love with ˹these˺ fine things out of remembrance for allah,” until they went out of sight.
so that you may warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, and so are heedless.
in all gardens will be noble, pleasant mates.
whoever commits evil or wrongs themselves then seeks allah’s forgiveness will certainly find allah all-forgiving, most merciful.
this is simply the tradition of our predecessors.
whenever a sign comes to them, they say, “we will never believe until we receive what allah’s messengers received.” allah knows best where to place his message. the wicked will soon be overwhelmed by humiliation from allah and a severe punishment for their evil plots.
˹he is the˺ lord of the heavens, and the earth, and everything in between. so worship him ˹alone˺, and be steadfast in his worship. do you know of anyone equal to him ˹in his attributes˺?”
o believers! fasting is prescribed for you—as it was for those before you—so perhaps you will become mindful ˹of allah˺.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “this is my way. i invite to allah with insight—i and those who follow me. glory be to allah, and i am not one of the polytheists.”
so let neither their wealth nor children impress you ˹o prophet˺. allah only intends to torment them through these things in this worldly life, then their souls will depart while they are disbelievers.
all we can say is that some of our gods have possessed you with evil.” he said, “i call allah to witness, and you too bear witness, that i ˹totally˺ reject whatever you associate
when our messenger-angels came to abraham with the good news ˹of the birth of isaac˺, they said, “we are going to destroy the people of this city ˹of sodom˺, for its people have persisted in wrongdoing.”
and let neither their wealth nor children impress you ˹o prophet˺. allah only intends to torment them through these things in this world, and ˹then˺ their souls will depart while they are disbelievers.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “are you urging me to worship ˹anyone˺ other than allah, o ignorant ones?”
’ȃd ˹also˺ rejected ˹the truth˺. then how ˹dreadful˺ were my punishment and warnings!
pharaoh threatened, “how dare you believe in him before i give you permission? he must be your master who taught you magic, but soon you will see. i will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, then crucify you all.”
indeed, neither the wealth nor children of the disbelievers will be of any benefit to them against allah. it is they who will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.
does he have the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ˹the hereafter˺?
then reduces it to withered chaff.
and declare, “the truth has come and falsehood has vanished. indeed, falsehood is bound to vanish.”
if we give people a taste of our mercy then take it away from them, they become utterly desperate, ungrateful.
and whoever endures patiently and forgives—surely this is a resolve to aspire to.
had we sent down this quran upon a mountain, you would have certainly seen it humbled and torn apart in awe of allah. we set forth such comparisons for people, ˹so˺ perhaps they may reflect.
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days—and his throne was upon the waters—in order to test which of you is best in deeds. and if you ˹o prophet˺ say, “surely you will ˹all˺ be raised up after death,” the disbelievers will certainly say, “that is nothing but pure magic!”
we know best what they say. and you ˹o prophet˺ are not ˹there˺ to compel them ˹to believe˺. so remind with the quran ˹only˺ those who fear my warning.
o my people! this worldly life is only ˹a fleeting˺ enjoyment, whereas the hereafter is truly the home of settlement.
if you tried to count allah’s blessings, you would never be able to number them. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
left to drink from a scalding spring.
˹remember, o believers,˺ when allah promised ˹to give˺ you the upper hand over either target, you wished to capture the unarmed party. but it was allah’s will to establish the truth by his words and uproot the disbelievers;
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “travel throughout the land and see the fate of the wicked.”
this is the favour of allah. he grants it to whoever he wills. and allah is the lord of infinite bounty.
so she conceived him and withdrew with him to a remote place.
and had we willed, we could have transfigured them on the spot, so they could neither progress forward nor turn back.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “it has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened ˹to the quran,˺ and said ˹to their fellow jinn˺: ‘indeed, we have heard a wondrous recitation.
secure in their trading caravan ˹to yemen˺ in the winter and ˹syria˺ in the summer—
and the earth—how it was levelled out?
but no! they have failed to comply with what he ordered.
once it sees them from a distance, they will hear it fuming and growling.
had we willed, we could have easily blinded their eyes, so they would struggle to find their way. how then could they see?
and—above all—to be one of those who have faith and urge each other to perseverance and urge each other to compassion.
o humanity! indeed, allah’s promise is true. so do not let the life of this world deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about allah.
and you devour ˹others’˺ inheritance greedily,
we will facilitate for them the path of hardship.
and we will never be punished.”
then woe on that day to the deniers—
he will forgive your sins, and admit you into gardens under which rivers flow, and ˹house you in˺ splendid homes in the gardens of eternity. that is the ultimate triumph.
as the two recording-angels—˹one˺ sitting to the right, and ˹the other to˺ the left—note ˹everything˺,
removing rage from their hearts. and allah pardons whoever he wills. for allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
they will have the fire as a home because of what they have committed.
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in truth. on the day ˹of judgment˺ he will say, ‘be!’ and there will be! his command is truth. all authority is his ˹alone˺ he is the knower of all—seen or unseen. and he is the all-wise, all-aware.”
and allah has made for you spouses of your own kind, and given you through your spouses children and grandchildren. and he has granted you good, lawful provisions. are they then faithful to falsehood and ungrateful for allah’s favours?
by those ˹angels˺ stripping out ˹evil souls˺ harshly,
we showered them with our mercy, and blessed them with honourable mention.
we are indeed able to show you what we have threatened them with.
and if we let them taste a mercy from us after being touched with adversity, they will certainly say, “this is what i deserve. i do not think the hour will ˹ever˺ come. and if in fact i am returned to my lord, the finest reward with him will definitely be mine.” but we will surely inform the disbelievers of what they used to do. and we will certainly make them taste a harsh torment.
he is the one who sends down rain after people have given up hope, spreading out his mercy. he is the guardian, the praiseworthy.
˹fear is˺ only for those who do wrong. but if they later mend ˹their˺ evil ˹ways˺ with good, then i am certainly all-forgiving, most merciful.
but whoever manages to stealthily eavesdrop is ˹instantly˺ pursued by a piercing flare.
in this way it is more likely that witnesses will give true testimony or else fear that their oaths could be refuted by those of the heirs. be mindful of allah and obey. for allah does not guide the rebellious people.
or say, upon seeing the torment, ‘if only i had a second chance, i would have been one of the good-doers.’
they are the ones who will receive allah’s blessings and mercy. and it is they who are ˹rightly˺ guided.
were we incapable of creating ˹them˺ the first time? in fact, they are in doubt about ˹their˺ re-creation.
then we fulfilled our promise to them, saving them along with whoever we willed and destroying the transgressors.
the day you will ˹try in vain to˺ turn your backs and run away, with no one to protect you from allah. and whoever allah leaves to stray will be left with no guide.
he responded, “if only i had the strength ˹to resist you˺ or could rely on a strong supporter.”
but those who commit evil, then repent and become ˹true˺ believers, your lord will certainly be all-forgiving, most-merciful.
or should every person ˹simply˺ have whatever ˹intercessors˺ they desire?
if you punish them, they belong to you after all. but if you forgive them, you are surely the almighty, all-wise.”
but my calls only made them run farther away.
again, no! never obey him ˹o prophet˺! rather, ˹continue to˺ prostrate and draw near ˹to allah˺.
surely those ˹pagans˺ love this fleeting world, ˹totally˺ neglecting a weighty day ahead of them.
with him ˹in worship˺. so let all of you plot against me without delay!
and that my torment is indeed the most painful.
surely your god is one!
but persisted in denial and turned away,
they and their spouses will be in ˹cool˺ shade, reclining on ˹canopied˺ couches.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i do not say to you that i possess allah’s treasuries or know the unseen, nor do i claim to be an angel. i only follow what is revealed to me.” say, “are those blind ˹to the truth˺ equal to those who can see? will you not then reflect?”
he created them from a sperm-drop, and ordained their development.
this denier neither believed nor prayed,
also, pharaoh and those before him, and ˹the people of˺ the overturned cities ˹of lot˺ indulged in sin,
as for the disbelievers, they will have the fire of hell, where they will not be ˹allowed to be˺ finished by death, nor will its torment be lightened for them. this is how we reward every ˹stubborn˺ disbeliever.
perhaps my lord will grant me ˹something˺ better than your garden, and send down upon your garden a thunderbolt from the sky, turning it into a barren waste.
they replied, “such has your lord decreed. he is truly the all-wise, all-knowing.”
so let them indulge ˹in falsehood˺ and amuse ˹themselves˺ until they face their day, which they have been threatened with—
and most people will not believe—no matter how keen you are—
“we only descend by the command of your lord. to him belongs whatever is before us, and whatever is behind us, and everything in between. and your lord is never forgetful.
or do they intend to scheme ˹against the prophet˺? then it is the disbelievers who will fall victim to ˹their˺ schemes.
when it is said to them, “follow what allah has revealed,” they reply, “no! we ˹only˺ follow what we found our forefathers practicing.” ˹would they still do so˺ even if satan is inviting them to the torment of the blaze?
but we delivered him and those in the ark, making it a sign for all people.
do not falter in pursuit of the enemy—if you are suffering, they too are suffering. but you can hope to receive from allah what they can never hope for. and allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
blessed is the one who has placed constellations in the sky, as well as a ˹radiant˺ lamp and a luminous moon.
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “have you considered whatever ˹idols˺ you invoke besides allah? show me what they have created on earth! or do they have a share in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens? bring me a scripture ˹revealed˺ before this ˹quran˺ or a shred of knowledge, if what you say is true.”
he is the one who produces gardens—both cultivated and wild—and palm trees, crops of different flavours, olives, and pomegranates—similar ˹in shape˺, but dissimilar ˹in taste˺. eat of the fruit they bear and pay the dues at harvest, but do not waste. surely he does not like the wasteful.
hell will be their bed; flames will be their cover. this is how we reward the wrongdoers.
but their faith was of no benefit to them when they saw our torment. this has ˹always˺ been allah’s way ˹of dealing˺ with his ˹wicked˺ servants. then and there the disbelievers were in ˹total˺ loss.
moses pleaded, “excuse me for forgetting, and do not be hard on me.”
˹as for˺ those who believe in allah and his messengers, it is they who are ˹truly˺ the people of truth. and the martyrs, with their lord, will have their reward and their light. but ˹as for˺ those who disbelieve and reject our signs, it is they who will be the residents of the hellfire.
o believers! intoxicants, gambling, idols, and drawing lots for decisions are all evil of satan’s handiwork. so shun them so you may be successful.
when our messenger-angels came to lot, he was distressed and worried by their arrival. he said, “this is a terrible day.”
“you ˹polytheists˺ may travel freely through the land for four months, but know that you will have no escape from allah, and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers.”
but those who do good—whether male or female—and have faith will enter paradise and will never be wronged ˹even as much as˺ the speck on a date stone.
they said, “by allah! you will not cease to remember joseph until you lose your health or ˹even˺ your life.”
the disbelievers say, “if only a sign could be sent down to him from his lord.” you ˹o prophet˺ are only a warner. and every people had a guide.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised, as a reward and ˹an ultimate˺ destination?
˹there are˺ those who slander ˹some of˺ the believers for donating liberally and mock others for giving only the little they can afford. allah will throw their mockery back at them, and they will suffer a painful punishment.
and you would have thought they were awake, though they were asleep. we turned them over, to the right and left, while their dog stretched his forelegs at the entrance. had you looked at them, you would have certainly fled away from them, filled with horror.
and there came a man, rushing from the farthest end of the city. he said, “o moses! the chiefs are actually conspiring against you to put you to death, so leave ˹the city˺. i really advise you ˹to do so˺.”
have you not seen those ˹hypocrites˺ who ally themselves with a people with whom allah is displeased? they are neither with you nor with them. and they swear to lies knowingly.
then, my lord, do not count me among the wrongdoing people.”
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations, it is they who will suffer a humiliating punishment.
surely to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. surely allah’s promise is ˹always˺ true, but most of them do not know.
do not consume one another’s wealth unjustly, nor deliberately bribe authorities in order to devour a portion of others’ property, knowing that it is a sin.
˹for˺ your lord is truly vigilant.
that is the one who repulses the orphan,
moses added, “if you along with everyone on earth were to be ungrateful, then ˹know that˺ allah is indeed self-sufficient, praiseworthy.”
and a fifth oath that allah may condemn him if he is lying.
and if two groups of believers fight each other, then make peace between them. but if one of them transgresses against the other, then fight against the transgressing group until they ˹are willing to˺ submit to the rule of allah. if they do so, then make peace between both ˹groups˺ in all fairness and act justly. surely allah loves those who uphold justice.
then from the farthest end of the city a man came, rushing. he advised, “o my people! follow the messengers.
they replied, “we have actually been sent to a wicked people,
they hear allah’s revelations recited to them, then persist ˹in denial˺ arrogantly as if they did not hear them. so give them good news of a painful punishment.
and mention in the book ˹o prophet, the story of˺ abraham. he was surely a man of truth and a prophet.
have you not seen those chiefs of the children of israel after moses? they said to one of their prophets, “appoint for us a king, ˹and˺ we will fight in the cause of allah.” he said, “are you not going to cower if ordered to fight?” they replied, “how could we refuse to fight in the cause of allah, while we were driven out of our homes and ˹separated from˺ our children?” but when they were ordered to fight, they fled, except for a few of them. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the wrongdoers.
indeed, those who abuse our revelations are not hidden from us. who is better: the one who will be cast into the fire or the one who will be secure on judgment day? do whatever you want. he is certainly all-seeing of what you do.
as for the polytheists who have honoured every term of their treaty with you and have not supported an enemy against you, honour your treaty with them until the end of its term. surely allah loves those who are mindful ˹of him˺.
and most of them do not believe in allah without associating others with him ˹in worship˺.
and so we have placed in every society the most wicked to conspire in it. yet they plot only against themselves, but they fail to perceive it.
they have no knowledge of this, nor did their forefathers. what a terrible claim that comes out of their mouths! they say nothing but lies.
this is how allah seals the hearts of those unwilling to know ˹the truth˺.
it is right to hope that allah will pardon them. for allah is ever-pardoning, all-forgiving.
as for those who strive to discredit our revelations, it is they who will be confined in punishment.
whenever our revelations are recited to him, he says, “ancient fables!”
˹proclaiming,˺ “hand over the servants of allah to me. i am truly a trustworthy messenger to you.
when they are reminded, they are never mindful.
that is that. and the transgressors will certainly have the worst destination:
but his people’s only response was to say, “expel lot’s followers from your land! they are a people who wish to remain chaste!”
and indeed, we once made a covenant with adam, but he forgot, and ˹so˺ we did not find determination in him.
we gave them the clear scripture,
˹it does not matter˺ whether you ˹o prophet˺ pray for them to be forgiven or not. even if you pray for their forgiveness seventy times, allah will never forgive them. that is because they have lost faith in allah and his messenger. and allah does not guide the rebellious people.
from among jinn and humankind.”
indeed, the righteous will be amid gardens and rivers,
we ˹later˺ sent him ˹back˺ to ˹his city of˺ at least one hundred thousand people,
have they not seen that allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills? surely in this are signs for people who believe.
they have made their ˹false˺ oaths as a shield, hindering ˹others˺ from the cause of allah. so they will suffer a humiliating punishment.
the seven heavens, the earth, and all those in them glorify him. there is not a single thing that does not glorify his praises—but you ˹simply˺ cannot comprehend their glorification. he is indeed most forbearing, all-forgiving.
indeed, the day of ˹final˺ decision is an appointed time—
divorced women must wait three monthly cycles ˹before they can re-marry˺. it is not lawful for them to conceal what allah has created in their wombs, if they ˹truly˺ believe in allah and the last day. and their husbands reserve the right to take them back within that period if they desire reconciliation. women have rights similar to those of men equitably, although men have a degree ˹of responsibility˺ above them. and allah is almighty, all-wise.
they ask ˹the believers˺, “when will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
we have never destroyed a society without warners
had allah willed, they would not have been polytheists. we have not appointed you as their keeper, nor are you their maintainer.
“and as for the boy, his parents were ˹true˺ believers, and we feared that he would pressure them into defiance and disbelief.
allah said, “then get down from paradise! it is not for you to be arrogant here. so get out! you are truly one of the disgraced.”
moulding you in whatever form he willed?
they will cry, “i wish i had sent forth ˹something good˺ for my ˹true˺ life.”
righteousness is not in turning your faces towards the east or the west. rather, the righteous are those who believe in allah, the last day, the angels, the books, and the prophets; who give charity out of their cherished wealth to relatives, orphans, the poor, ˹needy˺ travellers, beggars, and for freeing captives; who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and keep the pledges they make; and who are patient in times of suffering, adversity, and in ˹the heat of˺ battle. it is they who are true ˹in faith˺, and it is they who are mindful ˹of allah˺.
he provided you with cattle, and children,
do not spread corruption in the land after it has been set in order. and call upon him with hope and fear. indeed, allah’s mercy is always close to the good-doers.
were we wrong in mocking them ˹in the world˺? or do our eyes ˹just˺ fail to see them ˹in the fire˺?”
there was nothing it came upon that it did not reduce to ashes.
and say, “my lord! i seek refuge in you from the temptations of the devils.
exalted is allah, the true king! do not rush to recite ˹a revelation of˺ the quran ˹o prophet˺ before it is ˹properly˺ conveyed to you, and pray, “my lord! increase me in knowledge.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i seek refuge in the lord of humankind,
this was the advice of abraham—as well as jacob—to his children, ˹saying˺, “indeed, allah has chosen for you this faith; so do not die except in ˹a state of full˺ submission.”
˹then moses addressed his people,˺ “your only god is allah, there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. he encompasses everything in ˹his˺ knowledge.”
allah ordained this ˹reinforcement˺ only as good news for you and reassurance for your hearts. and victory comes only from allah—the almighty, all-wise—
you are not responsible for people’s guidance ˹o prophet˺—it is allah who guides whoever he wills. whatever you ˹believers˺ spend in charity, it is for your own good—as long as you do so seeking the pleasure of allah. whatever you donate will be paid back to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
then they are ˹all˺ returned to allah—their true master. judgment is his ˹alone˺. and he is the swiftest reckoner.
then the leaders will say to their followers, “you were no better than us! so taste the torment for what you used to commit.”
o humanity! what has emboldened you against your lord, the most generous,
on that day hypocrite men and women will beg the believers, “wait for us so that we may have some of your light.” it will be said ˹mockingly˺, “go back ˹to the world˺ and seek a light ˹there˺!” then a ˹separating˺ wall with a gate will be erected between them. on the near side will be grace and on the far side will be torment.
˹remember˺ when he questioned his father and his people, “what are these statues to which you are so devoted?”
can the one who knows that your lord’s revelation to you ˹o prophet˺ is the truth be like the one who is blind? none will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason.
and sent down from rainclouds pouring water,
lot prayed, “my lord! help me against the people of corruption.”
and ˹remember˺ when abraham said, “my lord, make this city ˹of mecca˺ secure and provide fruits to its people—those among them who believe in allah and the last day.” he answered, “as for those who disbelieve, i will let them enjoy themselves for a little while, then i will condemn them to the torment of the fire. what an evil destination!”
that ˹warning˺ was only ˹from˺ satan, trying to prompt you to fear his followers. so do not fear them; fear me if you are ˹true˺ believers.
solomon said, “we will see whether you are telling the truth or lying.
so it was. and we awarded it ˹all˺ to the children of israel.
burning in a scorching fire,
i ˹only˺ delay their end for a while, but my planning is flawless.
allah does not like negative thoughts to be voiced—except by those who have been wronged. allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
there will certainly be no fear for the close servants of allah, nor will they grieve.
so proclaim what you have been commanded, and turn away from the polytheists.
people ask you ˹o prophet˺ about the hour. say, “that knowledge is only with allah. you never know, perhaps the hour is near.”
o believers! turn to allah in sincere repentance, so your lord may absolve you of your sins and admit you into gardens, under which rivers flow, on the day allah will not disgrace the prophet or the believers with him. their light will shine ahead of them and on their right. they will say, “our lord! perfect our light for us, and forgive us. ˹for˺ you are truly most capable of everything.”
he is the one who raised for the illiterate ˹people˺ a messenger from among themselves—reciting to them his revelations, purifying them, and teaching them the book and wisdom, for indeed they had previously been clearly astray—
o my people! do not let your opposition to me lead you to a fate similar to that of the people of noah, or hûd, or salih. and the people of lot are not far from you.
they will be presented before your lord in rows, ˹and the deniers will be told,˺ “you have surely returned to us ˹all alone˺ as we created you the first time, although you ˹always˺ claimed that we would never appoint a time for your return.”
again, you will surely see it with the eye of certainty.
then when they have ˹almost˺ reached the end of their waiting period, either retain them honourably or separate from them honourably. and call two of your reliable men to witness ˹either way˺—and ˹let the witnesses˺ bear true testimony for ˹the sake of˺ allah. this is enjoined on whoever has faith in allah and the last day. and whoever is mindful of allah, he will make a way out for them,
so he threw down his staff and—behold!—it became a real snake.
surely in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers.
when they are tossed into it, they will hear its roaring as it boils over,
as for ’ȃd, they acted arrogantly throughout the land with no right, boasting, “who is superior to us in might?” did they not see that allah ˹himself˺, who created them, was far superior to them in might? still they persisted in denying our signs.
they say, “our hearts are unreceptive!” in fact, allah has condemned them for their disbelief. they have but little faith.
but if they disobey you, say, “i am certainly free of what you do.”
they seek to deceive allah and the believers, yet they only deceive themselves, but they fail to perceive it.
staying there forever. allah’s promise is true. and he is the almighty, all-wise.
who whispers into the hearts of humankind—
these are the ones against whom the fate of earlier communities of jinn and humans has been justified, ˹for˺ they were truly losers.
men are the caretakers of women, as men have been provisioned by allah over women and tasked with supporting them financially. and righteous women are devoutly obedient and, when alone, protective of what allah has entrusted them with. but if they change their ways, do not be unjust to them. surely allah is most high, all-great.
now, what makes you deny the ˹final˺ judgment?
so whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it.
he responded, “then if you follow me, do not question me about anything until i ˹myself˺ clarify it for you.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o people of the book! you have nothing to stand on unless you observe the torah, the gospel, and what has been revealed to you from your lord.” and your lord’s revelation to you ˹o prophet˺ will only cause many of them to increase in wickedness and disbelief. so do not grieve for the people who disbelieve.
but those who are mindful of their lord will be in gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever—as an accommodation from allah. and what is with allah is best for the virtuous.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “indeed, those who fabricate lies against allah will never succeed.”
all those in the heavens and the earth are dependent on him. day in and day out he has something to bring about.
as for those who believe and do good, we will admit them into gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. there they will have pure spouses, and we will place them under a vast shade.
he replied, “this is the parting of our ways. i will explain to you what you could not bear patiently.
but no! in fact, they do not fear the hereafter.
surely those who accuse chaste, unsuspecting, believing women are cursed in this life and the hereafter. and they will suffer a tremendous punishment
zachariah exclaimed, “my lord! how can i have a son when i am very old and my wife is barren?” he replied, “so will it be. allah does what he wills.”
then after the fear had left abraham, and the good news had reached him, he began to plead with us for the people of lot.
when our command came, we turned the cities upside down and rained down on them clustered stones of baked clay,
then it was struck by a torment from your lord while they slept,
such is the ˹crushing˺ grip of your lord when he seizes the societies entrenched in wrongdoing. indeed, his grip is ˹terribly˺ painful and severe.
and surely our messenger-angels came to abraham with good news ˹of a son˺. they greeted ˹him with˺, “peace!” and he replied, “peace ˹be upon you˺!” then it was not long before he brought ˹them˺ a ˹fat,˺ roasted calf.
proceed into the shade ˹of smoke˺ which rises in three columns,
glorify the name of your lord, the most high,
by the hands of angel-scribes,
˹they will be told,˺ “˹no!˺ this is because when allah alone was invoked, you ˹staunchly˺ disbelieved. but when others were associated with him ˹in worship˺, you ˹readily˺ believed. so ˹today˺ judgment belongs to allah ˹alone˺—the most high, all-great.”
one never tires of praying for good. and if touched with evil, they become desperate and hopeless.
can you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind or those clearly astray?
honourable angels, recording ˹everything˺.
will they not turn to allah in repentance and seek his forgiveness? and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
indeed, ˹it is˺ we ˹who˺ created humankind and ˹fully˺ know what their souls whisper to them, and we are closer to them than ˹their˺ jugular vein.
had allah known any goodness in them, he would have certainly made them hear. ˹but˺ even if he had made them hear, they would have surely turned away heedlessly.
and so they sought to harm him, but we made them inferior.
the nomadic arabs, who stayed behind, will say to you ˹o prophet˺, “we were preoccupied with our wealth and families, so ask for forgiveness for us.” they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. say, “who then can stand between you and allah in any way, if he intends harm or benefit for you? in fact, allah is all-aware of what you do.
if you do not, then beware of a war with allah and his messenger! but if you repent, you may retain your principal—neither inflicting nor suffering harm.
have you ˹o prophet˺ not seen those who fled their homes in the thousands for fear of death? allah said to them, “die!” then he gave them life. surely allah is ever bountiful to humanity, but most people are ungrateful.
until he reached the setting ˹point˺ of the sun, which appeared to him to be setting in a spring of murky water, where he found some people. we said, “o ⱬul-qarnain! either punish them or treat them kindly.”
are you ˹o prophet˺ not aware of the one who argued with abraham about his lord because allah had granted him kingship? ˹remember˺ when abraham said, “my lord is the one who has power to give life and cause death.” he argued, “i too have the power to give life and cause death.” abraham challenged ˹him˺, “allah causes the sun to rise from the east. so make it rise from the west.” and so the disbeliever was dumbstruck. and allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
marked by your lord for the transgressors.”
he ˹is the one who˺ gives life and causes death, and to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.
˹allah will say to the righteous,˺ “o tranquil soul!
sãd. by the quran, full of reminders!
and so we have sent to you ˹o prophet˺ a revelation by our command. you did not know of ˹this˺ book and faith ˹before˺. but we have made it a light, by which we guide whoever we will of our servants. and you are truly leading ˹all˺ to the straight path—
and remember you much,
we turn their hearts and eyes away ˹from the truth˺ as they refused to believe at first, leaving them to wander blindly in their defiance.
but some scold their parents, “enough with you! are you warning me that i will be brought forth ˹from the grave˺, while many generations had already perished before me ˹for good˺?” the parents cry to allah for help, ˹and warn their child,˺ “pity you. have faith! surely allah’s promise is true.” but the deniers insist, “this is nothing but ancient fables.”
surely your lord ˹alone˺ knows best who has strayed from his way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided.
but they roused a companion of theirs, so he dared to kill ˹her˺.
so what message after this ˹quran˺ would they believe in?
so his lord responded to him, turning their cunning away from him. surely he is the all-hearing, all-knowing.
and ˹remember˺ when we took your covenant that you would neither shed each other’s blood nor expel each other from their homes, you gave your pledge and bore witness.
then, on that day, you will definitely be questioned about ˹your worldly˺ pleasures.
indeed, the number of months ordained by allah is twelve—in allah’s record since the day he created the heavens and the earth—of which four are sacred. that is the right way. so do not wrong one another during these months. and together fight the polytheists as they fight against you together. and know that allah is with those mindful ˹of him˺.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “travel throughout the land and see how he originated the creation, then allah will bring it into being one more time. surely allah is most capable of everything.
and who give the rightful share of their wealth
he sends down the angels with revelation by his command to whoever he wills of his servants, ˹stating:˺ “warn ˹humanity˺ that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except me, so be mindful of me ˹alone˺.”
so after he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah, we granted him isaac and jacob, and made each of them a prophet.
and do not be like those who forgot allah, so he made them forget themselves. it is they who are ˹truly˺ rebellious.
and we truly know best who is most deserving of burning in it.
you will see ˹what will happen to˺ them, and they too will see!
and he is the one who spread out the earth and placed firm mountains and rivers upon it, and created fruits of every kind in pairs. he covers the day with night. surely in this are signs for those who reflect.
when we grant people our favours, they turn away, acting arrogantly. but when touched with evil, they lose all hope.
do they have control over shares of the kingdom? if so, they would not have given anyone so much as the speck on a date stone.
not at all! my revelations had already come to you, but you rejected them, acted arrogantly, and were one of the disbelievers.”
do not use allah’s name in your oaths as an excuse for not doing good, not guarding against evil, or not making peace between people. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
we already showed them the way, whether they ˹choose to˺ be grateful or ungrateful.
but not iblis, who refused to prostrate with the others.
˹beware of˺ the day we will summon every people with their leader. so whoever will be given their record in their right hand will read it ˹happily˺ and will not be wronged ˹even by the width of˺ the thread of a date stone.
each soul will come forth with an angel to drive it and another to testify.
the misleaders will reply, “no! you disbelieved on your own.
˹so˺ eat and graze your cattle. surely in this are signs for people of sound judgment.
and did he not find you needy then satisfied your needs?
with him are the keys of the unseen—no one knows them except him.
that was allah’s way with those ˹hypocrites˺ who have gone before. and you will find no change in allah’s way.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. and allah is most capable of everything.
indeed, we have placed constellations in the sky, and adorned it for all to see.
o you covered up ˹in your clothes˺!
and he brought down those from the people of the book who supported the enemy alliance from their own strongholds, and cast horror into their hearts. you ˹believers˺ killed some, and took others captive.
and indeed, it is—in the master record with us—highly esteemed, rich in wisdom.
as for those who disbelieve and deny our signs, they are the residents of the hellfire.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. and allah is fully aware of everything.
and with them will be maidens of modest gaze and equal age.
they said ˹to one another˺, “build him a furnace and cast him into the blazing fire.”
woe to every sinful liar.
what is revealed to me is that i am only sent with a clear warning.”
saying, “my lord! surely my bones have become brittle, and grey hair has spread across my head, but i have never been disappointed in my prayer to you, my lord!
corruption has spread on land and sea as a result of what people’s hands have done, so that allah may cause them to taste ˹the consequences of˺ some of their deeds and perhaps they might return ˹to the right path˺.
when saul marched forth with his army, he cautioned: “allah will test you with a river. so whoever drinks ˹his fill˺ from it is not with me, and whoever does not taste it—except a sip from the hollow of his hands—is definitely with me.” they all drank ˹their fill˺ except for a few! when he and the ˹remaining˺ faithful with him crossed the river, they said, “now we are no match for goliath and his warriors.” but those ˹believers˺ who were certain they would meet allah reasoned, “how many times has a small force vanquished a mighty army by the will of allah! and allah is ˹always˺ with the steadfast.”
indeed, we have warned you of an imminent punishment—the day every person will see ˹the consequences of˺ what their hands have done, and the disbelievers will cry, “i wish i were dust.”
there is none of you who will not pass over it. ˹this is˺ a decree your lord must fulfil.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “if you ˹sincerely˺ love allah, then follow me; allah will love you and forgive your sins. for allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.”
there they will call for every fruit in serenity.
then burn them in hell,
each garden yielded ˹all˺ its produce, never falling short. and we caused a river to flow between them.
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor.
we have surely made it a test for the wrongdoers.
mary wondered, “my lord! how can i have a child when no man has ever touched me?” an angel replied, “so will it be. allah creates what he wills. when he decrees a matter, he simply tells it, ‘be!’ and it is!
the old man proposed, “i wish to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you, provided that you stay in my service for eight years. if you complete ten, it will be ˹a favour˺ from you, but i do not wish to make it difficult for you. allah willing, you will find me an agreeable man.”
leaving the earth level and bare,
it was not the devils who brought this ˹quran˺ down:
has the story of the two plaintiffs, who scaled the ˹wall of david’s˺ sanctuary, reached you ˹o prophet˺?
hûd replied, “o my people! i am no fool! but i am a messenger from the lord of all worlds,
so they tasted the evil consequences of their doings, and the outcome of their doings was ˹total˺ loss.
and so we have made for every prophet enemies—devilish humans and jinn—whispering to one another with elegant words of deception. had it been your lord’s will, they would not have done such a thing. so leave them and their deceit,
he sets forth for you an example ˹drawn˺ from your own lives: would you allow some of those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession to be your equal partners in whatever ˹wealth˺ we have provided you, keeping them in mind as you are mindful of your peers? this is how we make the signs clear for people who understand.
˹they will be told,˺ “do not cry for help today. surely you will never be saved from us.
you never expected this book to be revealed to you, but ˹it came˺ only ˹as˺ a mercy from your lord. so never side with the disbelievers ˹in their disbelief˺.
so they set out, but after they had boarded a ship, the man made a hole in it. moses protested, “have you done this to drown its people? you have certainly done a terrible thing!”
shall i inform you of whom the devils ˹actually˺ descend upon?
even though you ˹o prophet˺ are keen on their guidance, allah certainly does not guide those he leaves to stray, and they will have no helpers.
to him belong the keys ˹of the treasuries˺ of the heavens and the earth. he gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills. indeed, he has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
and pray for forgiveness before dawn.
˹now,˺ if anything should amaze you ˹o prophet˺, then it is their question: “when we are reduced to dust, will we really be raised as a new creation?” it is they who have disbelieved in their lord. it is they who will have shackles around their necks. and it is they who will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.
who respond to their lord, establish prayer, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and donate from what we have provided for them;
˹they were told,˺ “do not run away! return to your luxuries and your homes, so you may be questioned ˹about your fate˺.”
pouring upon them a rain ˹of brimstone˺. how evil was the rain of those who had been warned!
have you considered the water you drink?
he has already revealed to you in the book that when you hear allah’s revelations being denied or ridiculed, then do not sit in that company unless they engage in a different topic, or else you will be like them. surely allah will gather the hypocrites and disbelievers all together in hell.
and from the fruits of palm trees and grapevines you derive intoxicants as well as wholesome provision. surely in this is a sign for those who understand.
have you ˹o prophet˺ not seen those who claim they believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? they seek the judgment of false judges, which they were commanded to reject. and satan ˹only˺ desires to lead them farther away.
the word of your lord has been perfected in truth and justice. none can change his words. and he is the all-hearing, all- knowing.
can those who had been dead, to whom we gave life and a light with which they can walk among people, be compared to those in complete darkness from which they can never emerge? that is how the misdeeds of the disbelievers have been made appealing to them.
and indeed, we had granted abraham sound judgment early on, for we knew him well ˹to be worthy of it˺.
and he said, “board it! in the name of allah it will sail and cast anchor. surely my lord is all-forgiving, most merciful.”
o humanity! it is you who stand in need of allah, but allah ˹alone˺ is the self-sufficient, praiseworthy.
whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. and whoever does evil, it is to their own loss. your lord is never unjust to ˹his˺ creation.
doer of whatever he wills.
the decree of our lord has come to pass against us ˹all˺: we will certainly taste ˹the punishment˺.
and he does not withhold ˹what is revealed to him of˺ the unseen.
and we certainly sent to the people of thamûd their brother salih, proclaiming, “worship allah,” but they suddenly split into two opposing groups.
except the people of the right,
leading up to the heavens and look for the god of moses, although i am sure he is a liar.” and so pharaoh’s evil deeds were made so appealing to him that he was hindered from the ˹right˺ way. but the plotting of pharaoh was only in vain.
by men who are not distracted—either by buying or selling—from allah’s remembrance, or performing prayer, or paying alms-tax. they fear a day when hearts and eyes will tremble,
but if such person is one of the misguided deniers,
say ˹o prophet, that allah says˺, “o my servants who believe! be mindful of your lord. those who do good in this world will have a good reward. and allah’s earth is spacious. only those who endure patiently will be given their reward without limit.”
with him ˹alone˺ is the knowledge of the hour. no fruit comes out of its husk, nor does a female conceive or deliver without his knowledge. and ˹consider˺ the day he will call to them, “where are my ˹so-called˺ associate-gods?” they will cry, “we declare before you that none of us testifies to that ˹any longer˺.”
he has placed into the earth firm mountains, so it does not shake with you, as well as rivers, and pathways so you may find your way.
it is only a brief enjoyment. then hell will be their home—what an evil place to rest!
and he is the one who gives life and causes death, and to him belongs the alternation of the day and night. will you not then understand?
o you wrapped ˹in your clothes˺!
and he swore to them, “i am truly your sincere advisor.”
surely to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. he knows well what you stand for. and ˹on˺ the day all will be returned to him, he will inform them of what they did. for allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
and if we delay their punishment until an appointed time, they will definitely say, “what is holding it back?” indeed, on the day it overtakes them, it will not be averted from them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule.
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so we seized him with a stern grip.
a messenger from allah, reciting scrolls of ˹utmost˺ purity,
believe in my revelations which confirm your scriptures. and be mindful of me.
when he saw a fire, he said to his family, “wait here, ˹for˺ i have spotted a fire. perhaps i can bring you a torch from it, or find some guidance at the fire.”
they responded, “˹that would be˺ no harm! surely to our lord we will ˹all˺ return.
i will make his fate unbearable,
then how ˹horrible˺ will it be when the angels take their souls, beating their faces and backs!
whenever a sûrah is revealed, some of them ask ˹mockingly˺, “which of you has this increased in faith?” as for the believers, it has increased them in faith and they rejoice.
the deeds of those who deny our signs and the meeting ˹with allah˺ in the hereafter will be in vain. will they be rewarded except for what they have done?”
then there came to them what they had been threatened with:
satan appealed, “my lord! then delay my end until the day of their resurrection.”
on the day allah resurrects them all together, he will then inform them of what they have done. allah has kept account of it all, while they have forgotten it. for allah is a witness over all things.
when it is said to them, “bow down ˹before allah,” they do not bow.
the lord of moses and aaron.”
˹he is the one˺ who has made the earth a place of settlement for you and the sky a canopy; and sends down rain from the sky, causing fruits to grow as a provision for you. so do not knowingly set up equals to allah ˹in worship˺.
worship then whatever ˹gods˺ you want instead of him.” say, “the ˹true˺ losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on judgment day. that is indeed the clearest loss.”
however, among the nomadic arabs are those who believe in allah and the last day, and consider what they donate as a means of coming closer to allah and ˹receiving˺ the prayers of the messenger. it will certainly bring them closer. allah will admit them into his mercy. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
as for the moon, we have ordained ˹precise˺ phases for it, until it ends up like an old, curved palm stalk.
why are you ˹believers˺ divided into two groups regarding the hypocrites while allah allowed them to regress ˹to disbelief˺ because of their misdeeds? do you wish to guide those left by allah to stray? and whoever allah leaves to stray, you will never find for them a way.
and when the records ˹of deeds˺ are laid open,
and hold firmly to the rope of allah and do not be divided. remember allah’s favour upon you when you were enemies, then he united your hearts, so you—by his grace—became brothers. and you were at the brink of a fiery pit and he saved you from it. this is how allah makes his revelations clear to you, so that you may be ˹rightly˺ guided.
the disbelievers say of the believers, “had it been ˹something˺ good, they would not have beaten us to it.” now since they reject its guidance, they will say, “˹this is˺ an ancient fabrication!”
the king said, “bring him to me. i will employ him exclusively in my service.” and when joseph spoke to him, the king said, “today you are highly esteemed and fully trusted by us.”
by the stars when they fade away!
we would have truly been allah’s devoted servants.”
or until you have a garden of palm trees and vineyards, and cause rivers to flow abundantly in it,
˹the forces of˺ pharaoh and thamûd?
becoming ungrateful for whatever ˹favours˺ we have given them. so enjoy yourselves, for soon you will know.
joseph’s brothers replied, “by allah! you know well that we did not come to cause trouble in the land, nor are we thieves.”
indeed, allah defends those who believe. surely allah does not like whoever is deceitful, ungrateful.
settle in your homes, and do not display yourselves as women did in the days of ˹pre-islamic˺ ignorance. establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey allah and his messenger. allah only intends to keep ˹the causes of˺ evil away from you and purify you completely, o members of the ˹prophet’s˺ family!
we strengthened his kingship, and gave him wisdom and sound judgment.
your only guardians are allah, his messenger, and fellow believers—who establish prayer and pay alms-tax with humility.
i seek no provision from them, nor do i need them to feed me.
he ˹alone˺ is indeed the all-hearing, all-knowing.
our lord! take us out of this ˹fire˺. then if we ever return ˹to denial˺, we will truly be wrongdoers.”
and drive the wicked to hell like a thirsty herd.
they will be waited on by eternal youths. if you saw them, you would think they were scattered pearls.
so we seized him and his soldiers, casting them into the sea. see then what was the end of the wrongdoers!
and allah invites ˹all˺ to the home of peace and guides whoever he wills to the straight path.
they argued, “how can we believe in you, when you are followed ˹only˺ by the lowest of the low?”
even then we ˹still˺ forgave you so perhaps you would be grateful.
and none of you could have shielded him ˹from us˺!
moses responded, “even if i bring you a clear proof?”
so moses threw down his staff and—behold!—it became a real snake.
and the day as it unveils it,
we have certainly granted you the seven often-repeated verses and the great quran.
forgive my father, for he is certainly one of the misguided.
we are indeed the ones lined up in ranks ˹for allah˺.
there certainly has come to you a messenger from among yourselves. he is concerned by your suffering, anxious for your well-being, and gracious and merciful to the believers.
so they returned with allah’s favours and grace, suffering no harm. for they sought to please allah. and surely allah is ˹the˺ lord of infinite bounty.
he cried, “my lord! i have surely called my people day and night,
had we sent down to you ˹o prophet˺ a revelation in writing and they were to touch it with their own hands, the disbelievers would still have said, “this is nothing but pure magic!”
and ˹remember˺ when we raised the mountain over them as if it were a cloud and they thought it would fall on them. ˹we said,˺ “hold firmly to that ˹scripture˺ which we have given you and observe its teachings so perhaps you will become mindful ˹of allah˺.”
indeed, those before them had plotted, but allah struck at the ˹very˺ foundation of their structure, so the roof collapsed on top of them, and the torment came upon them from where they did not expect.
or should we treat those who believe and do good like those who make mischief throughout the land? or should we treat the righteous like the wicked?
nor encouraged the feeding of the poor.
indeed, this is the absolute truth.
and we warned the children of israel in the scripture, “you will certainly cause corruption in the land twice, and you will become extremely arrogant.
this is how we reward the good-doers.
but no! there will be no refuge.
many are the societies whose end we delayed while they did wrong, then seized them. and to me is the final return.
fear allah and do not humiliate me.”
˹remember˺ when the prophet had ˹once˺ confided something to one of his wives, then when she disclosed it ˹to another wife˺ and allah made it known to him, he presented ˹to her˺ part of what was disclosed and overlooked a part. so when he informed her of it, she exclaimed, “who told you this?” he replied, “i was informed by the all-knowing, all-aware.”
who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against allah or deny his revelations? indeed, the wicked will never succeed.
˹saying,˺ “go early to your harvest, if you want to pick ˹all˺ the fruit.”
had we destroyed them with a torment before this ˹prophet came˺, they would have surely argued, “our lord! if only you had sent us a messenger, we would have followed your revelations before being humiliated and put to shame.”
surely allah knows the unseen of the heavens and earth. and allah is all-seeing of what you do.”
you will certainly taste the painful torment,
they replied, “glory be to you! we have no knowledge except what you have taught us. you are truly the all-knowing, all-wise.”
o believers! avoid many suspicions, ˹for˺ indeed, some suspicions are sinful. and do not spy, nor backbite one another. would any of you like to eat the flesh of their dead brother? you would despise that! and fear allah. surely allah is ˹the˺ accepter of repentance, most merciful.
those ˹destroyed˺ before them denied as well—and these ˹meccans˺ have not attained even one-tenth of what we had given their predecessors. yet ˹when˺ they denied my messengers, how severe was my response!
have the stories of those who disbelieved before not reached you ˹pagans˺? they tasted the evil consequences of their doings, and they will suffer a painful punishment.
˹remember˺ when we delivered him and all of his family,
and do not defraud people of their property. nor go about spreading corruption in the land.
the wrongdoers will certainly have a share ˹of the torment˺ like that of their predecessors. so do not let them ask me to hasten ˹it˺.
then when they saw the torment as a ˹dense˺ cloud approaching their valleys, they said ˹happily˺, “this is a cloud bringing us rain.” ˹but hûd replied,˺ “no, it is what you sought to hasten: a ˹fierce˺ wind carrying a painful punishment!”
and made life very easy for him.
o my fellow-prisoners! which is far better: many different lords or allah—the one, the supreme?
but if they pressure you to associate with me what you have no knowledge of, do not obey them. still keep their company in this world courteously, and follow the way of those who turn to me ˹in devotion˺. then to me you will ˹all˺ return, and then i will inform you of what you used to do.
indeed, we see you ˹o prophet˺ turning your face towards heaven. now we will make you turn towards a direction ˹of prayer˺ that will please you. so turn your face towards the sacred mosque ˹in mecca˺—wherever you are, turn your faces towards it. those who were given the scripture certainly know this to be the truth from their lord. and allah is never unaware of what they do.
o believers! do not seek the guardianship of those given the scripture before you and the disbelievers who have made your faith a mockery and amusement. and be mindful of allah if you are ˹truly˺ believers.
have you not seen that allah has subjected for you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and has lavished his favours upon you, both seen and unseen? ˹still˺ there are some who dispute about allah without knowledge, or guidance, or an enlightening scripture.
he merges the night into the day and the day into the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. that is allah—your lord! all authority belongs to him. but those ˹idols˺ you invoke besides him do not possess even the skin of a date stone.
the thunder glorifies his praises, as do the angels in awe of him. he sends thunderbolts, striking with them whoever he wills. yet they dispute about allah. and he is tremendous in might.
o believers! whoever among you abandons their faith, allah will replace them with others who love him and are loved by him. they will be humble with the believers but firm towards the disbelievers, struggling in the way of allah; fearing no blame from anyone. this is the favour of allah. he grants it to whoever he wills. and allah is all-bountiful, all-knowing.
everyone turns to their own direction ˹of prayer˺. so compete with one another in doing good. wherever you are, allah will bring you all together ˹for judgment˺. surely allah is most capable of everything.
allah sets forth an example for the disbelievers: the wife of noah and the wife of lot. each was married to one of our righteous servants, yet betrayed them. so their husbands were of no benefit to them against allah whatsoever. both were told, “enter the fire, along with the others!”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i am only a man like you, ˹but˺ it has been revealed to me that your god is only one god. so take the straight way towards him, and seek his forgiveness. and woe to the polytheists—
so we saved him and those with him in the fully loaded ark.
but when they ˹finally˺ reached the point where the seas met, they forgot their ˹salted˺ fish, and it made its way into the sea, slipping away ˹wondrously˺.
that snatched people up, leaving them like trunks of uprooted palm trees.
have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those before them? allah annihilated them, and a similar fate awaits the disbelievers.
after that you will surely die,
there are some among them who distort the book with their tongues to make you think this ˹distortion˺ is from the book—but it is not what the book says. they say, “it is from allah”—but it is not from allah. and ˹so˺ they attribute lies to allah knowingly.
but the one who had knowledge of the scripture said, “i can bring it to you in the blink of an eye.” so when solomon saw it placed before him, he exclaimed, “this is by the grace of my lord to test me whether i am grateful or ungrateful. and whoever is grateful, it is only for their own good. but whoever is ungrateful, surely my lord is self-sufficient, most generous.”
if you are in danger, pray on foot or while riding. but when you are safe, ˹take time to˺ remember allah for teaching you what you did not know.
for every community we appointed a code so do not let them dispute with you ˹o prophet˺ in this matter. and invite ˹all˺ to your lord, for you are truly on the right guidance.
the heavens nearly burst, one above the other, ˹in awe of him˺. and the angels glorify the praises of their lord, and seek forgiveness for those on earth. surely allah alone is the all-forgiving, most merciful.
allah has prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. that is the ultimate triumph.
but as soon as we removed the torments from them, they broke their promise.
and be gracious to the believers who follow you.
then ˹they will be told,˺ “greetings to you from the people of the right.”
˹the believers are also˺ those who are true to their trusts and covenants;
a fate ˹already˺ sealed,
and they attribute ˹angels as˺ daughters to allah—glory be to him!—the opposite of what they desire for themselves.
ending excuses and giving warnings.
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment. but those who believe and do good will have forgiveness and a great reward.
we send down rain from the sky in perfect measure, causing it to soak into the earth. and we are surely able to take it away.
joseph responded, “allah forbid that we should take other than the one with whom we found our property. otherwise, we would surely be unjust.”
the keepers will reply, “did your messengers not ˹constantly˺ come to you with clear proofs?” they will say, “yes ˹they did˺.” the keepers will say, “then pray! though the prayer of the disbelievers is only in vain.”
peace be upon him the day he was born, and the day of his death, and the day he will be raised back to life!
but if the husband cannot afford this, let him then fast two consecutive months before the couple touch each other. but if he is unable ˹to fast˺, then let him feed sixty poor people. this is to re-affirm your faith in allah and his messenger. these are the limits set by allah. and the disbelievers will suffer a painful punishment.
what will make you realize what judgment day is?
they vowed, “let us swear by allah that we will take him and his family down by night. then we will certainly say to his ˹closest˺ heirs, ‘we did not witness the murder of his family. we are definitely telling the truth.’”
allah forbids you from ever doing something like this again, if you are ˹true˺ believers.
arise and warn ˹all˺.
as they sit on ˹canopied˺ couches, looking on.
now, which of your lord’s favours will you dispute?
may he be condemned even more! how evil was what he determined!
how many signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by with indifference!
watching what they had ˹ordered to be˺ done to the believers,
when their messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were prideful in whatever ˹worldly˺ knowledge they had, and were ˹ultimately˺ overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule.
then we will give them a full account with sure knowledge—for we were never absent.
those whose hearts tremble at the remembrance of allah, who patiently endure whatever may befall them, and who establish prayer and donate from what we have provided for them.
some cattle are fit for labour, others are too small. eat of what allah has provided for you and do not follow satan’s footsteps. certainly, he is your sworn enemy.
and what will make you realize what ’illiyûn is?—
ask ˹them also,˺ “in whose hands is the authority over all things, protecting ˹all˺ while none can protect against him, if you ˹really˺ know?”
the tyrants will ask ˹one another˺, “but why do we not see those we considered to be lowly?
when their eyes will turn towards the residents of hell, they will pray, “our lord! do not join us with the wrongdoing people.”
for each community there is an appointed term. when their time arrives, they can neither delay it for a moment, nor could they advance it.
and ˹he is the one˺ who sends down rain from the sky in perfect measure, with which we give life to a lifeless land. and so will you be brought forth ˹from the grave˺.
i truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous day.”
they asked, “have you come to us with the truth, or is this a joke?”
if allah helps you, none can defeat you. but if he denies you help, then who else can help you? so in allah let the believers put their trust.
and that each person will only have what they endeavoured towards,
but when they stubbornly persisted in violation, we said to them, “be disgraced apes!”
˹they will be told,˺ “do not cry only once for destruction, but cry many times over!”
that is paradise, which we will grant to whoever is devout among our servants.
when some of ˹the righteous among˺ them questioned ˹their fellow sabbath-keepers˺, “why do you ˹bother to˺ warn those ˹sabbath-breakers˺ who will either be destroyed or severely punished by allah?” they replied, “just to be free from your lord’s blame, and so perhaps they may abstain.”
moses replied, “if i ever question you about anything after this, then do not keep me in your company, for by then i would have given you enough of an excuse.”
so give your close relatives their due, as well as the poor and the ˹needy˺ traveller. that is best for those who seek the pleasure of allah, and it is they who will be successful.
they will be in a life of bliss.
so what ˹other˺ path would you take?
and allah has favoured some of you over others in provision. but those who have been much favoured would not share their wealth with those ˹bondspeople˺ in their possession, making them their equals. do they then deny allah’s favours?
then we utterly destroyed the rest,
and moses said, “o pharaoh! i am truly a messenger from the lord of all worlds,
indeed, we will remove ˹that˺ torment for a while, and you ˹meccans˺ will return ˹to disbelief˺.
except the one eavesdropping, who is then pursued by a visible flare.
˹they are˺ those who are faithful and are mindful ˹of him˺.
˹remember˺ when the wife of ’imran said, “my lord! i dedicate what is in my womb entirely to your service, so accept it from me. you ˹alone˺ are truly the all-hearing, all-knowing.”
in fact, i had allowed enjoyment for these ˹meccans˺ and their forefathers, until the truth came to them along with a messenger making things clear.
whenever our revelations are recited to them, they say, “ancient fables!”
and the pharaoh of mighty structures?
so allah may separate the evil from the good. he will pile up the evil ones all together and then cast them into hell. they are the ˹true˺ losers.
and whoever commits an evil or sinful deed then blames it on an innocent person, they will definitely bear the guilt of slander and blatant sin.
there are some who say, “we believe in allah,” but when they suffer in the cause of allah, they mistake ˹this˺ persecution at the hands of people for the punishment of allah. but when victory comes from your lord, they surely say ˹to the believers˺, “we have always been with you.” does allah not know best what is in the hearts of all beings?
whenever our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them, “this is pure magic.”
indeed, we had established them in a way we have not established you ˹meccans˺. and we gave them hearing, sight, and intellect. but neither their hearing, sight, nor intellect were of any benefit to them whatsoever, since they persisted in denying allah’s signs. and ˹so˺ they were overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule.
have they not seen how we have made ˹mecca˺ a safe haven, whereas people ˹all˺ around them are snatched away? and deny allah’s favours?
if he were to do so and pressure you, you would withhold and he would bring out your resentment.
˹but they killed him, then˺ he was told ˹by the angels˺, “enter paradise!” he said, “if only my people knew
and the promised day ˹of judgment˺,
they pleaded, “o ⱬul-qarnain! surely gog and magog are spreading corruption throughout the land. should we pay you tribute, provided that you build a wall between us and them?”
surely those who say, “our lord is allah,” and then remain steadfast—there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
it is truly i. i am your lord! so take off your sandals, for you are in the sacred valley of ṭuwa.
and when the quran is recited to them, they do not bow down ˹in submission˺?
remember when you had been vastly outnumbered and oppressed in the land, constantly in fear of attacks by your enemy, then he sheltered you, strengthened you with his help, and provided you with good things so perhaps you would be thankful.
in each ˹garden˺ will be two flowing springs.
moses said to them, “cast whatever you wish to cast.”
your lord would never destroy a society until he had sent to its capital a messenger, reciting our revelations to them. nor would we ever destroy a society unless its people persisted in wrongdoing.
and mention in the book ˹o prophet, the story of˺ enoch. he was surely a man of truth and a prophet.
but they still rejected him, so we saved him and those with him in the ark and made them successors, and drowned those who rejected our signs. see then what was the end of those who had been warned!
so do not set up equals to allah, for allah certainly knows and you do not know.
allah has promised the believers, both men and women, gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever, and splendid homes in the gardens of eternity, and—above all—the pleasure of allah. that is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.
˹consider˺ the day ˹when˺ every soul will come pleading for itself, and each will be paid in full for what it did, and none will be wronged.
surely on that day they will ˹all˺ share in the punishment.
so ˹now˺ turn away from them ˹o prophet˺, for you will not be blamed.
indeed, they found their forefathers astray,
we certainly disperse it among them so they may be mindful, but most people persist in ungratefulness.
whenever our revelations are recited to them, they challenge ˹you˺, “we have already heard ˹the recitation˺. if we wanted, we could have easily produced something similar. this ˹quran˺ is nothing but ancient fables!”
they will plead, “our lord! you made us lifeless twice, and gave us life twice. now we confess our sins. so is there any way out?”
had it not been for a prior decree from allah, you would have certainly been disciplined with a tremendous punishment for whatever ˹ransom˺ you have taken.
they ˹also˺ say, “the offspring of this cattle is reserved for our males and forbidden to our females; but if it is stillborn, they may all share it.” he will repay them for their falsehood. surely he is all-wise, all-knowing.
so it was reduced to ashes.
he threatened, “how dare you reject my idols, o abraham! if you do not desist, i will certainly stone you ˹to death˺. so be gone from me for a long time!”
“indeed, my protector is allah who has revealed this book. for he ˹alone˺ protects the righteous.
do you find it astonishing that a reminder should come to you from your lord through one of your own, warning you, so you may beware and perhaps be shown mercy?”
they have indeed rejected the truth when it came to them, so they will soon face the consequences of their ridicule.
do they not know that allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills? surely in this are signs for people who believe.
do the disbelievers not realize that the heavens and earth were ˹once˺ one mass then we split them apart? and we created from water every living thing. will they not then believe?
out of both ˹waters˺ come forth pearls and coral.
˹allah is˺ the one to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, who has never had ˹any˺ offspring, nor does he have a partner in ˹governing˺ the kingdom. he has created everything, ordaining it precisely.
and whoever strives ˹in allah’s cause˺, only does so for their own good. surely allah is not in need of ˹any of˺ his creation.
all authority on that day is for allah ˹alone˺. he will judge between them. so those who believe and do good will be in the gardens of bliss.
my lord! bless me with righteous offspring.”
so that we may follow the magicians if they prevail?”
the disbelievers say ˹mockingly to one another˺, “shall we show you a man who claims that when you have been utterly disintegrated you will be raised as a new creation?
may the hands of abu lahab perish, and he ˹himself˺ perish!
they will reply, “we remained ˹only˺ a day or part of a day. but ask those who kept count.”
and meat from any bird they desire.
˹and it will be said to them,˺ “this is what you were promised, for whoever ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to allah˺ and kept up ˹his commandments˺—
and for every community there is a messenger. after their messenger has come, judgment is passed on them in all fairness, and they are not wronged.
the wicked will see the fire and realize that they are bound to fall into it, and will find no way to avoid it.
in fact, you are astonished ˹by their denial˺, while they ridicule ˹you˺.
˹a warning˺ similar to what we sent to those who divided ˹the scriptures˺,
and who are honest in their testimony;
if only they had been content with what allah and his messenger had given them and said, “allah is sufficient for us! allah will grant us out of his bounty, and so will his messenger. to allah ˹alone˺ we turn with hope.”
they argued, “you certainly know that we have no need for your daughters. you already know what we desire!”
is allah not the most just of all judges?
˹all will be resurrected,˺ yet the deniers are astonished that a warner has come to them from among themselves ˹warning of resurrection˺. so the disbelievers say, “this is an astonishing thing!
with their eyes downcast.
your duty is only to warn whoever is in awe of it.
those were ˹some of˺ the prophets who allah has blessed from among the descendants of adam, and of those we carried with noah ˹in the ark˺, and of the descendants of abraham and israel, and of those we ˹rightly˺ guided and chose. whenever the revelations of the most compassionate were recited to them, they fell down, prostrating and weeping.
so we inflicted punishment upon them. see then what was the fate of the deniers!
we have sent down the quran in truth, and with the truth it has come down. we have sent you ˹o prophet˺ only as a deliverer of good news and a warner.
wherever you may be, death will overcome you—even if you were in fortified towers.” when something good befalls them, they say, “this is from allah,” but when something evil befalls them, they say, “this is from you.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “both have been destined by allah.” so what is the matter with these people? they can hardly comprehend anything!
indeed, we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs, and he said: “i am a messenger of the lord of all worlds.”
woe on that day to the deniers!
˹and we said to him,˺ “take in your hand a bundle of grass, and strike ˹your wife˺ with it, and do not break your oath.” we truly found him patient. what an excellent servant ˹he was˺! indeed, he ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to allah˺.
we only created them for a purpose, but most of these ˹pagans˺ do not know.
o prophet! ˹always˺ be mindful of allah, and do not yield to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. indeed, allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
and they ask ˹the believers˺, “when will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
i do swear by this city ˹of mecca˺—
raising it high and forming it flawlessly.
when the disbelievers see you ˹o prophet˺, they only make fun of you, ˹saying,˺ “is this the one who speaks ˹ill˺ of your gods?” while they disbelieve at the mention of the most compassionate.
no! their knowledge of the hereafter amounts to ignorance. in fact, they are in doubt about it. in truth, they are ˹totally˺ blind to it.
do not follow what you have no ˹sure˺ knowledge of. indeed, all will be called to account for ˹their˺ hearing, sight, and intellect.
go with this shirt of mine and cast it over my father’s face, and he will regain his sight. then come back to me with your whole family.”
the same had already been said by those ˹destroyed˺ before them, but their ˹worldly˺ gains were of no benefit to them.
allah has promised those of you who believe and do good that he will certainly make them successors in the land, as he did with those before them; and will surely establish for them their faith which he has chosen for them; and will indeed change their fear into security—˹provided that˺ they worship me, associating nothing with me. but whoever disbelieves after this ˹promise˺, it is they who will be the rebellious.
even though you are not asking them for a reward for this ˹quran˺. it is only a reminder to the whole world.
if it is his will, he can remove you altogether, o humanity, and replace you with others. and allah is most capable to do so.
he sends down rain from the sky, causing the valleys to flow, each according to its capacity. the currents then carry along rising foam, similar to the slag produced from metal that people melt in the fire for ornaments or tools. this is how allah compares truth to falsehood. the ˹worthless˺ residue is then cast away, but what benefits people remains on the earth. this is how allah sets forth parables.
there are some of them who are critical of your distribution of alms ˹o prophet˺. if they are given some of it they are pleased, but if not they are enraged.
and the trumpet will be blown. this is the day ˹you were˺ warned of.
˹this is˺ when a man was killed and you disputed who the killer was, but allah revealed what you concealed.
allah will declare, “this is the day when ˹only˺ the faithful will benefit from their faithfulness. theirs are gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with him. that is the ultimate triumph.”
they ˹each˺ have varying degrees in the sight of allah. and allah is all-seeing of what they do.
the disbelievers say, “if only the quran had been sent down to him all at once!” ˹we have sent it˺ as such ˹in stages˺ so we may reassure your heart with it. and we have revealed it at a deliberate pace.
has the story of moses reached you ˹o prophet˺?
he certainly saw some of his lord’s greatest signs.
there will be a barrier between paradise and hell. and on the heights ˹of that barrier˺ will be people they will call out to the residents of paradise, “peace be upon you!” they will have not yet entered paradise, but eagerly hope to.
and everyone on earth altogether, just to save themselves.
then they will be asked, “where are those ˹idols˺ you used to associate
that will cause them neither headache nor intoxication.
so pray and sacrifice to your lord ˹alone˺.
the revelation of this book is—beyond doubt—from the lord of all worlds.
or ˹ask them,˺ “who originates the creation then resurrects it, and gives you provisions from the heavens and the earth? is it another god besides allah?” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “show ˹me˺ your proof, if what you say is true.”
and we blessed him with isaac ˹as a son˺ and jacob ˹as a grandson˺, as an additional favour—making all of them righteous.
he created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. he wraps the night around the day, and wraps the day around the night. and he has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. he is truly the almighty, most forgiving.
who does more wrong than the one who fabricates lies about allah when invited to submit ˹to him˺? for allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
˹soon˺ their united front will be defeated and ˹forced to˺ flee.
o believers! be mindful of allah and seek what brings you closer to him and struggle in his way, so you may be successful.
and allah sets forth a parable of two men: one of them is dumb, incapable of anything. he is a burden on his master. wherever he is sent, he brings no good. can such a person be equal to the one who commands justice and is on the straight path?
˹remember˺ when he fled to the overloaded ship.
and some men used to seek refuge with some jinn—so they increased each other in wickedness.
but indeed, it will take only one ˹mighty˺ blast,
my word cannot be changed, nor am i unjust to ˹my˺ creation.”
and grant me a helper from my family,
for truly you have ˹always˺ been overseeing us.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “perhaps some of what you seek to hasten is close at hand.”
and ˹it so happened that˺ pharaoh’s people picked him up, only to become their enemy and source of grief. surely pharaoh, haman, and their soldiers were sinful.
and pray, “my lord! allow me a blessed landing, for you are the best accommodator.”
and ˹remember˺ when we rescued you from the people of pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful torment—killing your sons and keeping your women. that was a severe test from your lord.
becoming scattered ˹particles of˺ dust,
he has no fear of consequences.
o believers! do not say, “ra’ina.” [herd us!] but say, “unẓurna,” [tend to us!] and listen ˹attentively˺. and the disbelievers will suffer a painful punishment.
does he not know that allah sees ˹all˺?
and allah has created from water every living creature. some of them crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. allah creates whatever he wills. surely allah is most capable of everything.
where they will not ˹be able to˺ live or die.
they certainly can be of no benefit to you against allah whatsoever. surely the wrongdoers are patrons of each other, whereas allah is the patron of the righteous.
the sun travels for its fixed term. that is the design of the almighty, all-knowing.
and ˹watch for˺ the day he will call to them, asking, “what response did you give to the messengers?”
o believers! indeed, many rabbis and monks consume people’s wealth wrongfully and hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah. give good news of a painful torment to those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in allah’s cause.
had allah not decreed exile for them, he would have certainly punished them in this world. and in the hereafter they will suffer the punishment of the fire.
none disputes the signs of allah except the disbelievers, so do not be deceived by their prosperity throughout the land.
not a word does a person utter without having a ˹vigilant˺ observer ready ˹to write it down˺.
the fire will burn their faces, leaving them deformed.
so it will be. and we will pair them to maidens with gorgeous eyes.
and it was said, “o earth! swallow up your water. and o sky! withhold ˹your rain˺.” the floodwater receded and the decree was carried out. the ark rested on mount judi, and it was said, “away with the wrongdoing people!”
and ˹remember˺ when we took a covenant from you and raised the mountain above you ˹saying˺, “hold firmly to that ˹scripture˺ which we have given you and observe its teachings so perhaps you will become mindful ˹of allah˺.”
o my believing servants! my earth is truly spacious, so worship me ˹alone˺.
then pour over their heads the torment of boiling water.”
˹this is˺ a discharge from all obligations, by allah and his messenger, to the polytheists you ˹believers˺ have entered into treaties with:
yet ˹some˺ people ask ˹mockingly˺, “after i die, will i really be raised to life again?”
this is certainly ˹mentioned˺ in the earlier scriptures—
the master of humankind,
and ˹remember˺ when we said to the angels, “prostrate before adam,” so they all did—but not iblis, who was one of the jinn, but he rebelled against the command of his lord. would you then take him and his descendants as patrons instead of me, although they are your enemy? what an evil alternative for the wrongdoers ˹to choose˺!
do you feel secure that he will not cause the land to swallow you up, or unleash upon you a storm of stones? then you will find none to protect you.
even though they were only commanded to worship allah ˹alone˺ with sincere devotion to him in all uprightness, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax. that is the upright way.
and they exclaimed, “if only this quran was revealed to a great man from ˹one of˺ the two cities!”
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger, then we surely have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing fire.
moses said, “go away then! and for ˹the rest of your˺ life you will surely be crying, ‘do not touch ˹me˺!’ that you cannot escape. now look at your god to which you have been devoted: we will burn it up, then scatter it in the sea completely.”
those who believed, migrated, and struggled in the cause of allah, and those who gave ˹them˺ shelter and help, they are the true believers. they will have forgiveness and an honourable provision.
that was because their messengers used to come to them with clear proofs, but they persisted in disbelief. so allah seized them. surely he is all-powerful, severe in punishment.
when their brother hûd said to them, “will you not fear ˹allah˺?
condemned are ˹disbelieving˺ humans! how ungrateful they are ˹to allah˺!
and when he reached maturity, we gave him wisdom and knowledge. this is how we reward the good-doers.
or who is it that will provide for you if he withholds his provision? in fact, they persist in arrogance and aversion ˹to the truth˺.
the day every person will remember all ˹their˺ striving,
my wealth has not benefited me!
then he swiftly turned on them, striking ˹them˺ with his right hand.
allah has certainly turned in mercy to the prophet as well as the emigrants and the helpers who stood by him in the time of hardship, after the hearts of a group of them had almost faltered. he then accepted their repentance. surely he is ever gracious and most merciful to them.
whoever intercedes for a good cause will have a share in the reward, and whoever intercedes for an evil cause will have a share in the burden. and allah is watchful over all things.
or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces, as you have claimed, or bring allah and the angels before us, face to face,
and indeed, we sent noah and abraham and reserved prophethood and revelation for their descendants. some of them are ˹rightly˺ guided, while most are rebellious.
they kept repeating their cry until we mowed them down, ˹leaving them˺ lifeless.
˹divine grace is˺ neither by your wishes nor those of the people of the book! whoever commits evil will be rewarded accordingly, and they will find no protector or helper besides allah.
indeed, the righteous will be in gardens and bliss,
and say, ‘glory be to our lord! surely the promise of our lord has been fulfilled.’
and to allah ˹alone˺ bows down ˹in submission˺ whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of living creatures, as do the angels—who are not too proud ˹to do so˺.
we have commanded people to honour their parents. but if they urge you to associate with me what you have no knowledge of, then do not obey them. to me you will ˹all˺ return, and then i will inform you of what you used to do.
surely those who believe and do good, their lord will guide them ˹to paradise˺ through their faith, rivers will flow under their feet in the gardens of bliss,
and your lord is certainly the almighty, most merciful.
they will have an easy reckoning,
by the sun and its brightness,
˹allah said,˺ “this is our gift, so give or withhold ˹as you wish˺, never to be called to account.”
as for those who repent, mend their ways, and let the truth be known, they are the ones to whom i will turn ˹in forgiveness˺, for i am the accepter of repentance, most merciful.
and luxuries which they fully enjoyed.
to him belong the ships with raised sails, sailing through the seas like mountains.
it is your lord who steers the ships for you through the sea, so that you may seek his bounty. surely he is ever merciful to you.
and do not let satan hinder you, ˹for˺ he is certainly your sworn enemy.
we certainly know that what they say grieves you ˹o prophet˺. it is not your honesty they question—it is allah’s signs that the wrongdoers deny.
say, “do you inform allah of your faith, when allah ˹already˺ knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.”
it is not for them ˹to do so˺, nor can they,
he responded, “it is allah who can bring it upon you if he wills, and then you will have no escape!
that you will have whatever you choose?
˹the faithful are˺ also those who are true to their trusts and covenants;
and so your lord’s decree has been proven true against the rebellious—that they will never believe.
˹and˺ taught them speech.
and o my people! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you. so leave her to graze ˹freely˺ on allah’s earth and do her no harm, or a swift punishment will overtake you!”
joseph responded, “it was she who tried to seduce me.” and a witness from her own family testified: “if his shirt is torn from the front, then she has told the truth and he is a liar.
so glorify the name of your lord, the greatest.
indeed, allah never wrongs ˹anyone˺—even by an atom’s weight. and if it is a good deed, he will multiply it many times over and will give a great reward out of his grace.
indeed, there are some among the people of the book who truly believe in allah and what has been revealed to you ˹believers˺ and what was revealed to them. they humble themselves before allah—never trading allah’s revelations for a fleeting gain. their reward is with their lord. surely allah is swift in reckoning.
we have not granted immortality to any human before you ˹o prophet˺: so if you die, will they live forever?
and surely to us ˹alone˺ belong this life and the next.
by the winds scattering ˹dust˺,
warn them ˹o prophet˺ of the approaching day when the hearts will jump into the throats, suppressing distress. the wrongdoers will have neither a close friend nor intercessor to be heard.
we are sending the she-camel as a test for them. so watch them ˹closely˺, and have patience.
or do their ˹intelligent˺ minds prompt them to this ˹paradox˺? or are they ˹just˺ a transgressing people?
it was not long before the bird came and said, “i have found out something you do not know. i have just come to you from sheba with sure news.
who entered upon him and greeted ˹him with˺, “peace!” he ˹later˺ said, “surely we are afraid of you.”
we have cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to comprehend it—and deafness in their ears. and when you mention your lord alone in the quran, they turn their backs in aversion.
but he denied and disobeyed ˹allah˺,
indeed, there was a sign for you in the two armies that met in battle—one fighting for the cause of allah and the other in denial. the believers saw their enemy twice their number. but allah supports with his victory whoever he wills. surely in this is a lesson for people of insight.
and ˹remember, o prophet,˺ when the disbelievers conspired to capture, kill, or exile you. they planned, but allah also planned. and allah is the best of planners.
and when the souls ˹and their bodies˺ are paired ˹once more˺,
they will never frustrate allah on earth, and they will have no protector besides allah. their punishment will be multiplied, for they failed to hear or see ˹the truth˺.
say, “i truly fear—if i were to disobey my lord—the torment of a tremendous day.”
there they will never hear any idle talk—only ˹greetings of˺ peace. and there they will have their provisions morning and evening.
and indeed, i seek refuge with my lord and your lord so you do not stone me ˹to death˺.
and when they leave ˹you˺, they strive throughout the land to spread mischief in it and destroy crops and cattle. allah does not like mischief.
and i do not seek to free myself from blame, for indeed the soul is ever inclined to evil, except those shown mercy by my lord. surely my lord is all-forgiving, most merciful.”
but whoever changes the will after hearing it, the blame will only be on those who made the change. indeed, allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
and we gave him back his family, twice as many, as a mercy from us and a lesson for people of reason.
˹from˺ a spring where allah’s servants will drink, flowing at their will.
indeed, these ˹meccans˺ say,
my advice will not benefit you—no matter how hard i try—if allah wills ˹for˺ you to stray. he is your lord, and to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.”
they replied, “we worship idols, to which we are fully devoted.”
along with thrones raised high,
allah has decreed, “i and my messengers will certainly prevail.” surely allah is all-powerful, almighty.
when it is said to them, “come to allah’s revelations and to the messenger,” you see the hypocrites turn away from you stubbornly.
similarly, no messenger came to those before them without being told: “a magician or a madman!”
˹remember˺ when you were running far away ˹in panic˺—not looking at anyone—while the messenger was calling to you from behind! so allah rewarded your disobedience with distress upon distress. now, do not grieve over the victory you were denied or the injury you suffered. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
do they not see how we drive rain to parched land, producing ˹various˺ crops from which they and their cattle eat? will they not then see?
how can you deny allah? you were lifeless and he gave you life, then he will cause you to die and again bring you to life, and then to him you will ˹all˺ be returned.
so what is the matter with the disbelievers that they rush ˹head-long˺ towards you ˹o prophet˺,
most certainly, one exceeds all bounds
we surely sent a messenger to every community, saying, “worship allah and shun false gods.” but some of them were guided by allah, while others were destined to stray. so travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers!
when death approaches any of them, they cry, “my lord! let me go back,
indeed, we sent noah to his people. he declared, “o my people! worship allah ˹alone˺. you have no god other than him. will you not then fear ˹him˺?”
then he fashioned them and had a spirit of his own ˹creation˺ breathed into them. and he gave you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹yet˺ you hardly give any thanks.
if you call upon them, they cannot hear your calls. and if they were to hear, they could not respond to you. on the day of judgment they will disown your worship ˹of them˺. and no one can inform you ˹o prophet˺ like the all-knowledgeable.
and so we have sent it down as an arabic quran and varied the warnings in it, so perhaps they will shun evil or it may cause them to be mindful.
perhaps your lord will have mercy on you ˹if you repent˺, but if you return ˹to sin˺, we will return ˹to punishment˺. and we have made hell a ˹permanent˺ confinement for the disbelievers.”
surely those ˹angels˺ nearest to your lord are not too proud to worship him. they glorify him. and to him they prostrate.
can ˹the misguided be like˺ those whose hearts allah has opened to islam, so they are enlightened by their lord? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened at the remembrance of allah! it is they who are clearly astray.
spend in the cause of allah and do not let your own hands throw you into destruction ˹by withholding˺. and do good, for allah certainly loves the good-doers.
we brought the children of israel across the sea. then pharaoh and his soldiers pursued them unjustly and oppressively. but as pharaoh was drowning, he cried out, “i believe that there is no god except that in whom the children of israel believe, and i am ˹now˺ one of those who submit.”
from the earth we created you, and into it we will return you, and from it we will bring you back again.
and he is the one who sends down rain from the sky—causing all kinds of plants to grow—producing green stalks from which we bring forth clustered grain. and from palm trees come clusters of dates hanging within reach. ˹there are˺ also gardens of grapevines, olives, and pomegranates, similar ˹in shape˺ but dissimilar ˹in taste˺. look at their fruit as it yields and ripens! indeed, in these are signs for people who believe.
surely those who receive our revelations with denial and arrogance, the gates of heaven will not be opened for them, nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle. this is how we reward the wicked.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i am only a warner. and there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except allah—the one, the supreme.
indeed, the residents of the stone valley also denied the messengers.
or whatever you think is harder to bring to life!” then they will ask ˹you˺, “who will bring us back ˹to life˺?” say, “the one who created you the first time.” they will then shake their heads at you and ask, “when will that be?” say, “perhaps it is soon!”
and the lady, in whose house he lived, tried to seduce him. she locked the doors ˹firmly˺ and said, “come to me!” he replied, “allah is my refuge! it is ˹not right to betray˺ my master, who has taken good care of me. indeed, the wrongdoers never succeed.”
they have also established a ˹marital˺ relationship between him and the jinn. yet the jinn ˹themselves˺ know well that such people will certainly be brought ˹for punishment˺.
and he would never ask you to take angels and prophets as lords. would he ask you to disbelieve after you have submitted?
but seeking the pleasure of their lord, the most high.
whoever desires this fleeting world ˹alone˺, we hasten in it whatever we please to whoever we will; then we destine them for hell, where they will burn, condemned and rejected.
what is the inevitable hour?
they will be sealed off from whatever they desire, as was done to their counterparts before. indeed, they were ˹all˺ in alarming doubt.
for your lord has decreed that you worship none but him. and honour your parents. if one or both of them reach old age in your care, never say to them ˹even˺ ‘ugh,’ nor yell at them. rather, address them respectfully.
˹he is the one˺ who created death and life in order to test which of you is best in deeds. and he is the almighty, all-forgiving.
and we have truly set forth every ˹kind of˺ lesson for humanity in this quran, yet most people persist in disbelief.
see how we have favoured some over others ˹in this life˺, but the hereafter is certainly far greater in rank and in favour.
˹all were˺ messengers delivering good news and warnings so humanity should have no excuse before allah after ˹the coming of˺ the messengers. and allah is almighty, all-wise.
solomon’s forces of jinn, humans, and birds were rallied for him, perfectly organized.
allah answered, “i am sending it down to you. but whoever among you denies afterwards will be subjected to a torment i have never inflicted on anyone of my creation.”
and it will surely be a source of regret for the disbelievers.
when the magicians came, they asked pharaoh, “shall we have a ˹suitable˺ reward if we prevail?”
strengthen me through him,
then when they submitted ˹to allah’s will˺, and abraham laid him on the side of his forehead ˹for sacrifice˺,
but it will be shunned by the most wretched,
similarly ˹to earlier messengers˺, we have revealed to you a book ˹o prophet˺. ˹the faithful of˺ those to whom we gave the scriptures believe in it, as do some of these ˹pagan arabs˺. and none denies our revelations except the ˹stubborn˺ disbelievers.
those who disbelieve and hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah have certainly strayed far away.
wait then ˹o prophet˺ for the day ˹when˺ the sky will be veiled in haze, clearly visible,
it is allah who has made the night for you to rest in and the day bright. surely allah is ever bountiful to humanity, but most people are ungrateful.
but allah encompasses them from all sides.
they said, “have you come to us so that we would worship allah alone and abandon what our forefathers used to worship? then bring us what you threaten us with, if what you say is true!”
calling upon him ˹alone˺ is the truth. but those ˹idols˺ the pagans invoke besides him ˹can˺ never respond to them in any way. ˹it is˺ just like someone who stretches out their hands to water, ˹asking it˺ to reach their mouths, but it can never do so. the calls of the disbelievers are only in vain.
he responded, “indeed, you and your forefathers have been clearly astray.”
obey allah and obey the messenger! but if you turn away, then our messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.
so do not be in doubt ˹o prophet˺ about what those ˹pagans˺ worship. they worship nothing except what their forefathers worshipped before ˹them˺. and we will certainly give them their share ˹of punishment˺ in full, without any reduction.
˹fully˺ pleased with their striving,
surely the disbelievers spend their wealth to hinder others from the path of allah. they will continue to spend to the point of regret. then they will be defeated and the disbelievers will be driven into hell,
and remember allah during ˹these˺ appointed days. whoever departs swiftly on the second day is not sinful, neither are those who stay behind ˹till the third—seeking additional reward˺, so long as they are mindful ˹of their lord˺. and be mindful of allah, and know that to him you will ˹all˺ be gathered.
to allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. and to allah ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺.
except those who are allies of a people you are bound with in a treaty or those wholeheartedly opposed to fighting either you or their own people. if allah had willed, he would have empowered them to fight you. so if they refrain from fighting you and offer you peace, then allah does not permit you to harm them.
do you find it astonishing that a reminder should come to you from your lord through one of your own so he may warn you? remember that he made you successors after the people of noah and increased you greatly in stature. so remember allah’s favours, so you may be successful.”
o believers! protect yourselves and your families from a fire whose fuel is people and stones, overseen by formidable and severe angels, who never disobey whatever allah orders—always doing as commanded.
later, when they were filled with remorse and realized they had gone astray, they cried, “if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us, we will certainly be losers.”
but whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and exceeds their limits will be cast into hell, to stay there forever. and they will suffer a humiliating punishment.
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal.
the residents of paradise will call out to the residents of the fire, “we have certainly found our lord’s promise to be true. have you too found your lord’s promise to be true?” they will reply, “yes, we have!” then a caller will announce to both, “may allah’s condemnation be upon the wrongdoers,
or have they taken others besides allah as intercessors? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “˹would they do so,˺ even though those ˹idols˺ have neither authority nor intelligence?”
and all they said was, “our lord! forgive our sins and excesses, make our steps firm, and grant us victory over the disbelieving people.”
˹they will be in˺ the gardens of eternity, promised in trust by the most compassionate to his servants. surely his promise will be fulfilled.
they challenge ˹the prophet˺, “we will never believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us,
they argued, “o hûd! you have not given us any clear proof, and we will never abandon our gods upon your word, nor will we believe in you.
˹remember˺ when moses said to his family, “i have spotted a fire. i will either bring you some directions from there, or a burning torch so you may warm yourselves.”
the most sensible of them said, “did i not urge you to say, ‘allah willing.’?”
except messengers of his choice. then he appoints angel-guards before and behind them
do you not see that allah sends down rain from the sky—channelling it through streams in the earth—then produces with it crops of various colours, then they dry up and you see them wither, and then he reduces them to chaff? surely in this is a reminder for people of reason.
so we sent against them a furious wind, for ˹several˺ miserable days, to make them taste a humiliating punishment in this worldly life. but far more humiliating will be the punishment of the hereafter. and they will not be helped.
it is not lawful for you ˹o prophet˺ to marry more women after this, nor can you replace any of your present wives with another, even if her beauty may attract you—except those ˹bondwomen˺ in your possession. and allah is ever watchful over all things.
and none led us astray other than the wicked.
those who ˹only˺ show off,
pharaoh threatened, “if you take any other god besides me, i will certainly have you imprisoned.”
and do not obey the despicable, vain oath-taker,
and what prevented their donations from being accepted is that they have lost faith in allah and his messenger, they never come to prayer except half-heartedly, and they never donate except resentfully.
when you travel through the land, it is permissible for you to shorten the prayer—˹especially˺ if you fear an attack by the disbelievers. indeed, the disbelievers are your sworn enemies.
we did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in between for sport.
or do they claim, “he made it up!”? tell them ˹o prophet˺, “produce one sûrah like it then, and seek help from whoever you can—other than allah—if what you say is true!”
in this way we have tested some by means of others, so those ˹disbelievers˺ may say, “has allah favoured these ˹poor believers˺ out of all of us?” does allah not best recognize the grateful?
indeed, we will have perfectly created their mates,
do not be like the woman who ˹foolishly˺ unravels her yarn after it is firmly spun, by taking your oaths as a means of deceiving one another in favour of a stronger group. surely allah tests you through this. and on the day of judgment he will certainly make your differences clear to you.
˹also˺ say, “he is the one who has dispersed you ˹all˺ over the earth, and to him you will ˹all˺ be gathered.”
why do you not bring us the angels, if what you say is true?”
we forbade the jews certain foods that had been lawful to them for their wrongdoing, and for hindering many from the way of allah,
this is how allah makes his revelations clear to you, so perhaps you will understand.
and the hypocrites say, “we believe in allah and the messenger, and we obey.” then a group of them turns away soon after that. these are not ˹true˺ believers.
indeed, neither the wealth nor children of the disbelievers will be of any benefit to them against allah—and they will be the fuel for the fire.
so travel with your family in the dark of night, and follow ˹closely˺ behind them. do not let any of you look back, and go where you are commanded.”
it is not fit for a prophet that he should take captives until he has thoroughly subdued the land. you ˹believers˺ settled with the fleeting gains of this world, while allah’s aim ˹for you˺ is the hereafter. allah is almighty, all-wise.
joseph began searching their bags before that of his brother ˹benjamin˺, then brought it out of benjamin’s bag. this is how we inspired joseph to plan. he could not have taken his brother under the king’s law, but allah had so willed. we elevate in rank whoever we will. but above those ranking in knowledge is the one all-knowing.
marry off the ˹free˺ singles among you, as well as the righteous of your bondmen and bondwomen. if they are poor, allah will enrich them out of his bounty. for allah is all-bountiful, all-knowing.
he punishes whoever he wills, and shows mercy to whoever he wills. and you will ˹all˺ be returned to him.
over which they disagree.
he is the one who sends the winds ushering in his mercy. when they bear heavy clouds, we drive them to a lifeless land and then cause rain to fall, producing every type of fruit. similarly, we will bring the dead to life, so perhaps you will be mindful.
they will offer ˹full˺ submission to allah on that day, and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them.
but if they repent, perform prayer, and pay alms-tax, then they are your brothers in faith. this is how we make the revelations clear for people of knowledge.
david ˹eventually˺ ruled, “he has definitely wronged you in demanding ˹to add˺ your sheep to his. and certainly many partners wrong each other, except those who believe and do good—but how few are they!” then david realized that we had tested him so he asked for his lord’s forgiveness, fell down in prostration, and turned ˹to him in repentance˺.
but those who strive to discredit our revelations, they will be the residents of the hellfire.”
and why should allah not punish them while they hinder pilgrims from the sacred mosque, claiming to be its rightful guardians? none has the right to guardianship except those mindful ˹of allah˺, but most pagans do not know.
indeed, before them we tested pharaoh’s people: a noble messenger came to them,
not even hearing the slightest hissing from it. and they will delight forever in what their souls desire.
they swore by allah their most solemn oaths that if a warner were to come to them, they would certainly be better guided than any other community. yet when a warner did come to them, it only drove them farther away—
we provide both the former and the latter from the bounty of your lord. and the bounty of your lord can never be withheld.
we have surely sent you with the truth ˹o prophet˺ as a deliverer of good news and a warner. and you will not be accountable for the residents of the hellfire.
permission ˹to fight back˺ is ˹hereby˺ granted to those being fought, for they have been wronged. and allah is truly most capable of helping them ˹prevail˺.
and ˹even˺ their mother and father,
allah knows what every female bears and what increases and decreases in the wombs. and with him everything is determined with precision.
or grants both, sons and daughters, ˹to whoever he wills˺, and leaves whoever he wills infertile. he is indeed all-knowing, most capable.
they responded, “we are a people of strength and great ˹military˺ might, but the decision is yours, so decide what you will command.”
and how should i fear your associate-gods, while you have no fear in associating ˹others˺ with allah—a practice he has never authorized? which side has more right to security? ˹tell me˺ if you really know!”
paradise as their own. they will be there forever.
we brought the children of israel across the sea and they came upon a people devoted to idols. they demanded, “o moses! make for us a god like their gods.” he replied, “indeed, you are a people acting ignorantly!
and make my task easy,
and ˹so˺ they made a plan, but we too made a plan, while they were unaware.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o humanity! i am only sent to you with a clear warning.
and by the ˹sacred˺ house frequently visited!
whoever suspects an error or an injustice in the will and brings about a ˹fair˺ settlement among the parties will not be sinful. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
this is news of the unseen that we reveal to you ˹o prophet˺. you were not with them when they cast lots to decide who would be mary’s guardian, nor were you there when they argued ˹about it˺.
the jews and christians each claim that none will enter paradise except those of their own faith. these are their desires. reply, ˹o prophet,˺ “show ˹me˺ your proof if what you say is true.”
to stay there for ever and ever—never will they find any protector or helper.
and he is the one who originates the creation then will resurrect it—which is even easier for him. to him belong the finest attributes in the heavens and the earth. and he is the almighty, all-wise.
indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth; the alternation of the day and the night; the ships that sail the sea for the benefit of humanity; the rain sent down by allah from the skies, reviving the earth after its death; the scattering of all kinds of creatures throughout; the shifting of the winds; and the clouds drifting between the heavens and the earth—˹in all of this˺ are surely signs for people of understanding.
“there is nothing beyond our first death, and we will never be resurrected.
o prophet! when the believing women come to you, pledging to you that they will neither associate anything with allah ˹in worship˺, nor steal, nor fornicate, nor kill their children, nor falsely attribute ˹illegitimate˺ children to their husbands, nor disobey you in what is right, then accept their pledge, and ask allah to forgive them. surely allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
then he made his descendants from an extract of a humble fluid,
as for those who commit evil, the reward of an evil deed is its equivalent. humiliation will cover them—with no one to protect them from allah—as if their faces were covered with patches of the night’s deep darkness. it is they who will be the residents of the fire. they will be there forever.
while you are certainly observed by vigilant,
it will only take one blast, then at once they will all be brought before us.
and the people were asked, “will you join the gathering,
and ˹remember˺ the one who guarded her chastity, so we breathed into her through our angel, ˹gabriel,˺ making her and her son a sign for all peoples.
then we raised other generations after them.
or if we show you what we threaten them with, we certainly have full power over them.
o believers! do not take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers. would you like to give allah solid proof against yourselves?
say, “he is the most compassionate—in him ˹alone˺ we believe, and in him ˹alone˺ we trust. you will soon know who is clearly astray.”
had he not ˹constantly˺ glorified ˹allah˺,
aaron had already warned them beforehand, “o my people! you are only being tested by this, for indeed your ˹one true˺ lord is the most compassionate. so follow me and obey my orders.”
why then did those ˹idols˺ they took as gods—hoping to get closer ˹to him˺—not come to their aid? instead, they failed them. that is ˹the result of˺ their lies and their fabrications.
they challenge you ˹o prophet˺ to hasten the torment. and allah will never fail in his promise. but a day with your lord is indeed like a thousand years by your counting.
this is part of the wisdom which your lord has revealed to you ˹o prophet˺. and do not set up any other god with allah ˹o humanity˺, or you will be cast into hell, blameworthy, rejected.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “allah has declared the truth. so follow the way of abraham, the upright—who was not a polytheist.”
and the hellfire will be displayed for all to see—
and this ˹quran˺ is a blessed reminder which we have revealed. will you ˹pagans˺ then deny it?
˹so˺ fight them and allah will punish them at your hands, put them to shame, help you overcome them, and soothe the hearts of the believers—
none will avert it—
but if any of you cannot afford to marry a free believing woman, then ˹let him marry˺ a believing bondwoman possessed by one of you. allah knows best ˹the state of˺ your faith ˹and theirs˺. you are from one another. this is for those of you who fear falling into sin. but if you are patient, it is better for you. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
’ȃd, pharaoh, the kinfolk of lot,
screening herself off from them. then we sent to her our angel, ˹gabriel,˺ appearing before her as a man, perfectly formed.
this is my brother. he has ninety-nine sheep while i have ˹only˺ one. ˹still˺ he asked me to give it up to him, overwhelming me with ˹his˺ argument.”
˹but˺ allah will surely admit those who believe and do good into gardens, under which rivers flow, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing will be silk,
the man from egypt who bought him said to his wife, “take good care of him, perhaps he may be useful to us or we may adopt him as a son.” this is how we established joseph in the land, so that we might teach him the interpretation of dreams. allah’s will always prevails, but most people do not know.
do not take a ˹human˺ life—made sacred by allah—except with ˹legal˺ right. for they are already supported ˹by law˺.
you can never escape ˹him˺ on earth, nor do you have any protector or helper besides allah.
none will have the right to intercede, except those who have taken a covenant from the most compassionate.
there is no restriction on the blind, or the disabled, or the sick. this is how allah makes his revelations clear to you, so perhaps you will understand.
they responded, “we give you good news in all truth, so do not be one of those who despair.”
do you not see that allah has subjected to you whatever is in the earth as well as the ships ˹that˺ sail through the sea by his command? he keeps the sky from falling down on the earth except by his permission. surely allah is ever gracious and most merciful to humanity.
as for the foremost—the first of the emigrants—and those who follow them in goodness, allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with him. and he has prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. that is the ultimate triumph.
lord of the throne, the all-glorious,
as for your women past the age of menstruation, in case you do not know, their waiting period is three months, and those who have not menstruated as well. as for those who are pregnant, their waiting period ends with delivery. and whoever is mindful of allah, he will make their matters easy for them.
worship allah ˹alone˺, fear him, and obey me.
he said, “you will certainly be subjected to your lord’s torment and wrath. do you dispute with me regarding the so-called gods which you and your forefathers have made up—a practice allah has never authorized? then wait! i too am waiting with you.”
so what you suffered on the day the two armies met was by allah’s will, so that he might distinguish the ˹true˺ believers
he will bless your deeds for you, and forgive your sins. and whoever obeys allah and his messenger, has truly achieved a great triumph.
they replied, “let him and his brother wait and send mobilizers to all cities
that you should worship none but allah. i truly fear for you the torment of a painful day.”
do they think that no one sees them?
but if the truth is in their favour, they come to him, fully submitting.
fleeing from a lion?
anticipating something devastating to befall them.
˹simply˺ because the blind man came to him ˹interrupting˺.
these are two opposing groups that disagree about their lord: as for the disbelievers, garments of fire will be cut out for them and boiling water will be poured over their heads,
and ˹remember˺ when lot scolded ˹the men of˺ his people, ˹saying,˺ “do you commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before?
instead of allah, they only invoke female gods and they ˹actually˺ invoke none but a rebellious satan—
as for those who struggle in our cause, we will surely guide them along our way. and allah is certainly with the good-doers.
this is truly what you ˹all˺ used to doubt.”
or do you have a scripture, in which you read
and ˹it was˺ he ˹who˺ turned the cities ˹of sodom and gomorrah˺ upside down.
and ˹made˺ the mountains as ˹its˺ pegs,
let them then produce something like it, if what they say is true!
but why do they come to you for judgment when they ˹already˺ have the torah containing allah’s judgment, then they turn away after all? they are not ˹true˺ believers.
then we inspired moses, “throw down your staff,” and—behold!—it devoured the objects of their illusion!
may he be condemned! how evil was what he determined!
they threatened, “if you do not desist, o noah, you will surely be stoned ˹to death˺.”
and as for ’ȃd, they were destroyed by a furious, bitter wind
and they even demanded his angel-guests from him, so we blinded their eyes. ˹and they were told,˺ “taste then my punishment and warnings!”
indeed, those who disbelieve, hinder ˹others˺ from the way of allah, and defy the messenger after ˹true˺ guidance has become clear to them; they will not harm allah in the least, but he will render their deeds void.
nor repulse the beggar.
do they associate ˹with allah˺ those ˹idols˺ which cannot create anything, but are in fact created;
when he had provided them with their supplies, he demanded, “bring me your brother on your father’s side. do you not see that i give full measure and i am the best of hosts?
the residents of the fire cannot be equal to the residents of paradise. ˹only˺ the residents of paradise will be successful.
or a little more—and recite the quran ˹properly˺ in a measured way.
we really hope that our lord will forgive our sins, as we are the first to believe.”
relate to them ˹o prophet˺ the story of noah when he said to his people, “o my people! if my presence and my reminders to you of allah’s signs are unbearable to you, then ˹know that˺ i have put my trust in allah. so devise a plot along with your associate-gods—and you do not have to be secretive about your plot—then carry it out against me without delay!
the hypocrites fear that a sûrah should be revealed about them, exposing what is in their hearts. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “keep mocking! allah will definitely bring to light what you fear.”
but no! in fact, their hearts have been stained by all ˹the evil˺ they used to commit!
speak to him gently, so perhaps he may be mindful ˹of me˺ or fearful ˹of my punishment˺.”
have you ˹o prophet˺ not seen those who were given a portion of the scriptures yet trade it for misguidance and wish to see you deviate from the ˹right˺ path?
see ˹o prophet˺ how they call you names! so they have gone so ˹far˺ astray that they cannot find the ˹right˺ way.
˹they are˺ those who have been expelled from their homes for no reason other than proclaiming: “our lord is allah.” had allah not repelled ˹the aggression of˺ some people by means of others, destruction would have surely claimed monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which allah’s name is often mentioned. allah will certainly help those who stand up for him. allah is truly all-powerful, almighty.
whoever allies themselves with allah, his messenger, and fellow believers, then it is certainly allah’s party that will prevail.
you ˹o prophet˺ are truly one of the messengers
ask ˹the pagans, o prophet˺, “have you seen that which allah has sent down for you as a provision, of which you have made some lawful and some unlawful?” say, “has allah given you authorization, or are you fabricating lies against allah?”
yet he already misled great multitudes of you. did you not have any sense?
“do not let any poor person enter your garden today.”
then how ˹dreadful˺ were my punishment and warnings!
the fertile land produces abundantly by the will of its lord, whereas the infertile land hardly produces anything. this is how we vary ˹our˺ lessons to those who are thankful.
from this, joseph should know that i did not speak dishonestly about him in his absence, for allah certainly does not guide the scheming of the dishonest.
when one is touched with hardship, they cry out to us ˹alone˺. then when we shower our blessings upon them, they say, “i have been granted all this only because of ˹my˺ knowledge.” not at all! it is ˹no more than˺ a test. but most of them do not know.
but as a reminder to those in awe ˹of allah˺.
awaiting them is hell, and they will be left to drink oozing pus,
it is certainly we who resurrect the dead, and write what they send forth and what they leave behind. everything is listed by us in a perfect record.
˹making it˺ perfectly upright, to warn ˹the disbelievers˺ of a severe torment from him; to give good news to the believers—who do good—that they will have a fine reward,
and we strengthened their hearts when they stood up and declared, “our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth. we will never call upon any god besides him, or we would truly be uttering an outrageous lie.”
allah said, “get out of paradise! you are disgraced and rejected! i will certainly fill up hell with you and your followers all together.”
or ˹ask them,˺ “who responds to the distressed when they cry to him, relieving ˹their˺ affliction, and ˹who˺ makes you successors in the earth? is it another god besides allah? yet you are hardly mindful!”
o my people! how is it that i invite you to salvation, while you invite me to the fire!
they were followed by a curse in this world, as they will be on the day of judgment. surely ’ad denied their lord. so away with ’ad, the people of hûd.
o believers! enter into islam wholeheartedly and do not follow satan’s footsteps. surely he is your sworn enemy.
˹some of the gains will be˺ for poor emigrants who were driven out of their homes and wealth, seeking allah’s bounty and pleasure, and standing up for allah and his messenger. they are the ones true in faith.
but as for the one who came to you, eager ˹to learn˺,
o dear father! do not worship satan. surely satan is ever rebellious against the most compassionate.
if they turn away, then say, “i have warned you all equally. i do not know if what you are threatened with is near or far.
˹watch for˺ the day he will call to them, “where are those you claimed were my associate-gods?”
when we made you equal to the lord of all worlds.
and whenever our clear revelations are recited to them, their only argument is to say: “bring our forefathers back, if what you say is true!”
surely the hypocrites seek to deceive allah, but he outwits them. when they stand up for prayer, they do it half-heartedly only to be seen by people—hardly remembering allah at all.
those who disbelieve in it ˹ask to˺ hasten it ˹mockingly˺. but the believers are fearful of it, knowing that it is the truth. surely those who dispute about the hour have gone far astray.
you are only a human being like us, so bring forth a sign if what you say is true.”
so they rejected him, and ˹so˺ we destroyed them. surely in this is a sign. yet most of them would not believe.
and created for them similar things to ride in.
the jews say, “ezra is the son of allah,” while the christians say, “the messiah is the son of allah.” such are their baseless assertions, only parroting the words of earlier disbelievers. may allah condemn them! how can they be deluded ˹from the truth˺?
those who spend their wealth in the cause of allah and do not follow their charity with reminders of their generosity or hurtful words—they will get their reward from their lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
go with this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then stand aside and see how they will respond.”
but we are all on the alert.”
and it will be said to them, “where are those you used to worship
˹it is˺ they who have patiently endured, and in their lord they put their trust.
˹only˺ allah knows what is in their hearts. so turn away from them, caution them, and give them advice that will shake their very souls.
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. he gives life and causes death. and he is most capable of everything.
o believers! when you contract a loan for a fixed period of time, commit it to writing. let the scribe maintain justice between the parties. the scribe should not refuse to write as allah has taught them to write. they will write what the debtor dictates, bearing allah in mind and not defrauding the debt. if the debtor is incompetent, weak, or unable to dictate, let their guardian dictate for them with justice. call upon two of your men to witness. if two men cannot be found, then one man and two women of your choice will witness—so if one of the women forgets the other may remind her. the witnesses must not refuse when they are summoned. you must not be against writing ˹contracts˺ for a fixed period—whether the sum is small or great. this is more just ˹for you˺ in the sight of allah, and more convenient to establish evidence and remove doubts. however, if you conduct an immediate transaction among yourselves, then there is no need for you to record it, but call upon witnesses when a deal is finalized. let no harm come to the scribe or witnesses. if you do, then you have gravely exceeded ˹your limits˺. be mindful of allah, for allah ˹is the one who˺ teaches you. and allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
he is allah—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him: knower of the seen and unseen. he is the most compassionate, most merciful.
it was not you ˹believers˺ who killed them, but it was allah who did so. nor was it you ˹o prophet˺ who threw ˹a handful of sand at the disbelievers˺, but it was allah who did so, rendering the believers a great favour. surely allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
the day their scheming will be of no benefit to them whatsoever, nor will they be helped.
and proclaim the blessings of your lord.
then we drowned the others.
allah surely knows that whatever ˹gods˺ they invoke besides him are ˹simply˺ nothing. for he is the almighty, all-wise.
and placed ˹in them˺ a shining lamp,
this is ˹the reward˺ for what your hands have done. and allah is never unjust to ˹his˺ creation.”
do not rush your tongue trying to memorize ˹a revelation of˺ the quran.
this is how we rewarded them for their ingratitude. would we ever punish ˹anyone in such a way˺ except the ungrateful?
had we willed, we could have easily sent a warner to every society.
˹some of˺ the nomadic arabs say, “we believe.” say, ˹o prophet,˺ “you have not believed. but say, ‘we have submitted,’ for faith has not yet entered your hearts. but if you obey allah and his messenger ˹wholeheartedly˺, he will not discount anything from ˹the reward of˺ your deeds. allah is truly all-forgiving, most merciful.”
the messengers said, “your bad omen lies within yourselves. are you saying this because you are reminded ˹of the truth˺? in fact, you are a transgressing people.”
he would have almost tricked us away from our gods, had we not been so devoted to them.” ˹but˺ soon they will know, when they face the punishment, who is far astray from the ˹right˺ way.
there they will be ˹fervently˺ screaming, “our lord! take us out ˹and send us back˺. we will do good, unlike what we used to do.” ˹they will be told,˺ “did we not give you lives long enough so that whoever wanted to be mindful could have done so? and the warner came to you. so taste ˹the punishment˺, for the wrongdoers have no helper.”
in which their prayer will be, “glory be to you, o allah!” and their greeting will be, “peace!” and their closing prayer will be, “all praise is for allah—lord of all worlds!”
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “who can put you out of allah’s reach if he intends to harm you or show you mercy?” they can never find any protector or helper besides allah.
and the dying person realizes it is ˹their˺ time to depart,
in fact, we have allowed enjoyment for these ˹meccans˺ and their forefathers for such a long time ˹that they took it for granted˺. do they not see that we gradually reduce ˹their˺ land from its borders? is it they who will then prevail?
they argued, “we did not break our promise to you of our own free will, but we were made to carry the burden of the people’s ˹golden˺ jewellery, then we threw it ˹into the fire˺, and so did the samiri.”
surely in this are lessons. and we ˹always˺ put ˹people˺ to the test.
those who disbelieve and wrong themselves—surely allah will neither forgive them nor guide them to any path
˹allah responded,˺ “leave with my servants at night, for you will surely be pursued.
all that so he may make satan’s influence a trial for those ˹hypocrites˺ whose hearts are sick and those ˹disbelievers˺ whose hearts are hardened. surely the wrongdoers are totally engrossed in opposition.
they responded, “by the one who created us! we will never prefer you over the clear proofs that have come to us. so do whatever you want! your authority only covers the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world.
but if your helpers fail you, then know that it has been revealed with the knowledge of allah, and that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him! will you ˹not˺ then submit ˹to allah˺?
have they not then looked at the sky above them: how we built it and adorned it ˹with stars˺, leaving it flawless?
allah has ˹also˺ prepared for them a severe punishment. so fear allah, o people of reason and faith. allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder,
allah does not place two hearts in any person’s chest. nor does he regard your wives as ˹unlawful for you like˺ your real mothers, ˹even˺ if you say they are. these are only your baseless assertions. but allah declares the truth, and he ˹alone˺ guides to the ˹right˺ way.
but for breaking their covenant we condemned them and hardened their hearts. they distorted the words of the scripture and neglected a portion of what they had been commanded to uphold. you ˹o prophet˺ will always find deceit on their part, except for a few. but pardon them and bear with them. indeed, allah loves the good-doers.
we have surely set forth in this quran every ˹kind of˺ lesson for people, but humankind is the most argumentative of all beings.
the approaching ˹hour˺ has drawn near.
a believing man from pharaoh’s people, who was hiding his faith, argued, “will you kill a man ˹only˺ for saying: ‘my lord is allah,’ while he has in fact come to you with clear proofs from your lord? if he is a liar, it will be to his own loss. but if he is truthful, then you will be afflicted with some of what he is threatening you with. surely allah does not guide whoever is a transgressor, a total liar.
the day all will appear ˹before allah˺. nothing about them will be hidden from him. ˹he will ask,˺ “who does all authority belong to this day? to allah—the one, the supreme!
when our command came, we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us and spared them the disgrace of that day. surely your lord ˹alone˺ is the all-powerful, almighty.
those who accuse chaste women ˹of adultery˺ and fail to produce four witnesses, give them eighty lashes ˹each˺. and do not ever accept any testimony from them—for they are indeed the rebellious—
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “praise be to allah, and peace be upon the servants he has chosen.” ˹ask the disbelievers,˺ “which is better: allah or whatever ˹gods˺ they associate ˹with him˺?”
that is because they said ˹privately˺ to those who ˹also˺ detest what allah has revealed, “we will obey you in some matters.” but allah ˹fully˺ knows what they are hiding.
he replied, “i have been granted all this because of some knowledge i have.”
the lowly will say to the arrogant, “no! it was your plotting by day and night—when you ordered us to disbelieve in allah and to set up equals with him.” they will ˹all˺ hide ˹their˺ remorse when they see the torment. and we will put shackles around the necks of the disbelievers. will they be rewarded except for what they used to do?
so fear allah, and obey me.
and to the people of thamûd we sent their brother salih. he said, “o my people! worship allah—you have no other god except him. a clear proof has come to you from your lord: this is allah’s she-camel as a sign to you. so leave her to graze ˹freely˺ on allah’s land and do not harm her, or else you will be overcome by a painful punishment.
˹so the deniers will be told,˺ “taste ˹the punishment˺, for all you will get from us is more torment.”
and burning in hellfire.
and remember the brother of ’ȃd, when he warned his people, who inhabited the sand-hills—there were certainly warners before and after him—˹saying,˺ “worship none but allah. i truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous day.”
the people of pharaoh. will they not fear ˹allah˺?”
whether you speak openly ˹or not˺, he certainly knows what is secret and what is even more hidden.
but we see it as inevitable.
their fate will be like that of the people of pharaoh and those before them—they all rejected our signs, so allah seized them for their sins. and allah is severe in punishment.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “invoke those you claim ˹to be divine˺ besides him—they do not have the power to undo harm from you or transfer it ˹to someone else˺.”
and we are indeed the ones ˹constantly˺ glorifying ˹his praise˺.”
it will be said ˹to the disbelievers˺, “call upon your associate-gods ˹for help˺.” so they will call them, but will receive no response. and they will face the punishment, wishing they had been ˹rightly˺ guided!
and the sky is torn apart,
and to lot we gave wisdom and knowledge, and delivered him from the society engrossed in shameful practices. they were certainly an evil, rebellious people.
and certainly the hour is coming, there is no doubt about it. and allah will surely resurrect those in the graves.
˹remember˺ when allah said, “o jesus! i will take you and raise you up to myself. i will deliver you from those who disbelieve, and elevate your followers above the disbelievers until the day of judgment. then to me you will ˹all˺ return, and i will settle all your disputes.
he dimmed its night, and brought forth its daylight.
o people of the book! why do you reject the signs of allah while you bear witness ˹to their truth˺?
he responded, “should i trust you with him as i once trusted you with his brother ˹joseph˺? but ˹only˺ allah is the best protector, and he is the most merciful of the merciful.”
this will be their accommodation on the day of judgment.
the enjoyment of ˹worldly˺ desires—women, children, treasures of gold and silver, fine horses, cattle, and fertile land—has been made appealing to people. these are the pleasures of this worldly life, but with allah is the finest destination.
˹then they will be asked,˺ “what is the matter with you that you can no longer help each other?”
o believers! do not devour one another’s wealth illegally, but rather trade by mutual consent. and do not kill ˹each other or˺ yourselves. surely allah is ever merciful to you.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “o humanity! i am allah’s messenger to you all. to him ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. he gives life and causes death.” so believe in allah and his messenger, the unlettered prophet, who believes in allah and his revelations. and follow him, so you may be ˹rightly˺ guided.
o my people! i do not ask you for a payment for this ˹message˺. my reward is only from allah. and i will never dismiss the believers, for they will surely meet their lord. but i can see that you are a people acting ignorantly.
˹we instructed him:˺ “o david! we have surely made you an authority in the land, so judge between people with truth. and do not follow ˹your˺ desires or they will lead you astray from allah’s way. surely those who go astray from allah’s way will suffer a severe punishment for neglecting the day of reckoning.”
˹knowing that˺ none should feel secure from their lord’s punishment—
in the shade of black smoke,
how can you then take this message lightly,
and the earth and mountains will be lifted up and crushed with one blow,
for they never expected any reckoning,
the fire ˹pit˺, filled with fuel—
no calamity ˹or blessing˺ occurs on earth or in yourselves without being ˹written˺ in a record before we bring it into being. this is certainly easy for allah.
every ˹destined˺ matter has a ˹set˺ time to transpire. and you will soon come to know.
˹consider, o prophet,˺ the day we will call ˹a prophet as˺ a witness from every faith-community. then the disbelievers will neither be allowed to plead nor appease ˹their lord˺.
the only response of the ˹true˺ believers, when they are called to allah and his messenger so he may judge between them, is to say, “we hear and obey.” it is they who will ˹truly˺ succeed.
if we had commanded them to sacrifice themselves or abandon their homes, none would have obeyed except for a few. had they done what they were advised to do, it would have certainly been far better for them and more reassuring,
he replied, “my lord! i fear that they will reject me.
our lord! make us both ˹fully˺ submit to you and from our descendants a nation that will submit to you. show us our rituals, and turn to us in grace. you are truly the accepter of repentance, most merciful.
there is not a ˹wicked˺ society that we will not destroy or punish with a severe torment before the day of judgment. that is written in the record.
my lord! save me and my family from ˹the consequences of˺ what they do.”
or ˹ask them,˺ “who made the earth a place of settlement, caused rivers to flow through it, placed firm mountains upon it, and set a barrier between ˹fresh and salt˺ bodies of water? was it another god besides allah?” absolutely not! but most of them do not know.
indeed, those who have the best claim to abraham are his followers, this prophet, and the believers. and allah is the guardian of those who believe.
and night. will you not then understand?
indeed, the ˹crushing˺ grip of your lord is severe.
˹he is the˺ knower of the unseen, disclosing none of it to anyone,
these are allah’s revelations which we recite to you ˹o prophet˺ in truth. so what message will they believe in after ˹denying˺ allah and his revelations?
are they only waiting for the hour to take them by surprise? yet ˹some of˺ its signs have already come. once it actually befalls them, will it not be too late to be mindful?
and we would have granted them a great reward by our grace
he replied, “yes, and you will then certainly be among those closest to me.”
and when the stars fall down,
and when he saw that their hands did not reach for the food, he became suspicious and fearful of them. they reassured ˹him˺, “do not be afraid! we are ˹angels˺ sent ˹only˺ against the people of lot.”
so be patient, for the promise of allah certainly is true. and do not be disturbed by those who have no sure faith.
have they not seen the birds glide in the open sky? none holds them up except allah. surely in this are signs for those who believe.
and he is the one who merges the two bodies of water: one fresh and palatable and the other salty and bitter, placing between them a barrier they cannot cross.
allah has sealed their hearts and their hearing, and their sight is covered. they will suffer a tremendous punishment.
for then everyone will have enough concern of their own.
he replied, “that knowledge is with my lord in a record. my lord neither falters nor forgets ˹anything˺.”
o believers! respond to allah and his messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life. and know that allah stands between a person and their heart, and that to him you will all be gathered.
indeed, allah commands justice, grace, as well as courtesy to close relatives. he forbids indecency, wickedness, and aggression. he instructs you so perhaps you will be mindful.
the reward of an evil deed is its equivalent. but whoever pardons and seeks reconciliation, then their reward is with allah. he certainly does not like the wrongdoers.
our lord! raise from among them a messenger who will recite to them your revelations, teach them the book and wisdom, and purify them. indeed, you ˹alone˺ are the almighty, all-wise.”
˹consider the day˺ when they will dispute in the fire, and the lowly ˹followers˺ will appeal to the arrogant ˹leaders˺, “we were your ˹dedicated˺ followers, will you then shield us from a portion of the fire?”
who set up another god with allah. so cast them into the severe punishment.”
and it is allah’s will to turn to you in grace, but those who follow their desires wish to see you deviate entirely ˹from allah’s way˺.
they will cry, “oh, woe to us! this is the day of judgment!”
and the judgment will certainly come to pass.
they attribute to allah what they hate ˹for themselves˺, and their tongues utter the lie that they will have the finest reward. without a doubt, for them is the fire, where they will be abandoned.
let there be a group among you who call ˹others˺ to goodness, encourage what is good, and forbid what is evil—it is they who will be successful.
we have certainly brought them a book which we explained with knowledge—a guide and mercy for those who believe.
they demand, “if only he could bring us a sign from his lord!”
only returning our favours with ingratitude. so enjoy yourselves, for you will soon know.
those who disbelieve in their lord will suffer the punishment of hell. what an evil destination!
˹consider˺ the day he will gather them ˹all˺ together and say, “o assembly of jinn! you misled humans in great numbers.” and their human associates will say, “our lord! we benefited from each other’s company, surely your lord is all-wise, all-knowing.
we raised from among them leaders, guiding by our command, when they patiently endured and firmly believed in our signs.
as for the disbelievers, they are guardians of one another. and unless you ˹believers˺ act likewise, there will be great oppression and corruption in the land.
˹always˺ yielding its fruit in every season by the will of its lord. this is how allah sets forth parables for the people, so perhaps they will be mindful.
here you are, being invited to donate ˹a little˺ in the cause of allah. still some of you withhold. and whoever does so, it is only to their own loss. for allah is the self-sufficient, whereas you stand in need ˹of him˺. if you ˹still˺ turn away, he will replace you with another people. and they will not be like you.
since we have sent you a messenger from among yourselves—reciting to you our revelations, purifying you, teaching you the book and wisdom, and teaching you what you never knew—
but those of them well-grounded in knowledge, the faithful ˹who˺ believe in what has been revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ and what was revealed before you—˹especially˺ those who establish prayer—and those who pay alms-tax and believe in allah and the last day, to these ˹people˺ we will grant a great reward.
we said, “descend all of you! then when guidance comes to you from me, whoever follows it, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
have the deniers not considered how many peoples we destroyed before them who never came back to life again?
the day no kith or kin will be of benefit to another whatsoever, nor will they be helped,
but when he granted their descendants good offspring, they associated false gods in what he has given them. exalted is allah above what they associate ˹with him˺!
then bring ˹us˺ your scripture, if what you say is true!
providing neither coolness nor shelter from the flames.
obeying its lord as it must, ˹surely you will all be judged˺.
and among those we created is a group that guides with the truth and establishes justice accordingly.
then when your armies met, allah made them appear as few in your eyes, and made you appear as few in theirs, so allah may establish what he had destined. and to allah ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺.
allah has never had ˹any˺ offspring, nor is there any god besides him. otherwise, each god would have taken away what he created, and they would have tried to dominate one another. glorified is allah above what they claim!
and placed upon it towering, firm mountains, and given you fresh water to drink?
that is so. and whoever honours the symbols of allah, it is certainly out of the piety of the heart.
but if they settle on divorce, then allah is indeed all-hearing, all-knowing.
we will remove whatever bitterness they had in their hearts. in a friendly manner, they will be on thrones, facing one another.
shu’aib responded, “my lord knows best whatever you do.”
so be patient ˹o prophet˺ with what they say. and glorify the praises of your lord before sunrise and before sunset.
do you really lust after men instead of women? in fact, you are ˹only˺ a people acting ignorantly.”
if we ever will something ˹to exist˺, all we say is: “be!” and it is!
successful indeed is the one who purifies their soul,
he is the ever-living. there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. so call upon him with sincere devotion, ˹saying,˺ “all praise is for allah—lord of all worlds.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “bring then a scripture from allah which is a better guide than these two so i may follow it, if your claim is true.”
o believers! if you yield to the disbelievers, they will drag you back to disbelief—and you will become losers.
before them, the people of noah denied ˹the truth˺ and rejected our servant, calling ˹him˺ insane. and he was intimidated.
do you think you will be admitted into paradise without being tested like those before you? they were afflicted with suffering and adversity and were so ˹violently˺ shaken that ˹even˺ the messenger and the believers with him cried out, “when will allah’s help come?” indeed, allah’s help is ˹always˺ near.
true authority on that day will belong ˹only˺ to the most compassionate. and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers.
on that day no soul will be wronged in the least, nor will you be rewarded except for what you used to do.
surely your lord ˹alone˺ will gather them together ˹for judgment˺. he is truly all-wise, all-knowing.
condemned are the liars—
it is not your wealth or children that bring you closer to us. but those who believe and do good—it is they who will have a multiplied reward for what they did, and they will be secure in ˹elevated˺ mansions.
but you cannot will ˹to do so˺ unless allah wills. indeed, allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
or do they say, “he has fabricated a lie about allah!”? ˹if you had,˺ allah would have sealed your heart, if he willed. and allah wipes out falsehood and establishes the truth by his words. he certainly knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
there is also a sign for them in the night: we strip from it daylight, then—behold!—they are in darkness.
˹they are˺ those whose efforts are in vain in this worldly life, while they think they are doing good!”
they preferred to stay behind with the helpless, and their hearts have been sealed so they do not comprehend.
far from easy for the disbelievers.
as for those who believe and do good, the most compassionate will ˹certainly˺ bless them with ˹genuine˺ love.
the arrogant chiefs of his people asked the lowly who believed among them, “are you certain that salih has been sent by his lord?” they replied, “we certainly believe in what he has been sent with.”
and you will see them exposed to the fire, fully humbled out of disgrace, stealing glances ˹at it˺. and the believers will say, “the ˹true˺ losers are those who have lost themselves and their families on judgment day.” the wrongdoers will certainly be in everlasting torment.
˹beware of˺ the day the shin ˹of allah˺ will be bared, and the wicked will be asked to prostrate, but they will not be able to do so,
when their brother salih said to them, “will you not fear ˹allah˺?
˹we responded,˺ “stomp your foot: ˹now˺ here is a cool ˹and refreshing˺ spring for washing and drinking.”
if you have suffered injuries ˹at uhud˺, they suffered similarly ˹at badr˺. we alternate these days ˹of victory and defeat˺ among people so that allah may reveal the ˹true˺ believers, choose martyrs from among you—and allah does not like the wrongdoers—
˹they will be˺ a multitude from earlier generations
asking ˹mockingly˺, “when is this day of judgment?”
then after that will come seven years of great hardship which will consume whatever you have saved, except the little you will store ˹for seed˺.
some of the nomads around you ˹believers˺ are hypocrites, as are some of the people of medina. they have mastered hypocrisy. they are not known to you ˹o prophet˺; they are known to us. we will punish them twice ˹in this world˺, then they will be brought back ˹to their lord˺ for a tremendous punishment.
be moderate in your pace. and lower your voice, for the ugliest of all voices is certainly the braying of donkeys.”
if you ask them ˹o prophet˺ who created them, they will certainly say, “allah!” how can they then be deluded ˹from the truth˺?
yes ˹they would˺! surely their lord has always been all-seeing of them.
˹one day˺ he inspected the birds, and wondered, “why is it that i cannot see the hoopoe? or could he be absent?
and your fellow man is not insane.
the description of the paradise promised to the righteous is that in it are rivers of fresh water, rivers of milk that never changes in taste, rivers of wine delicious to drink, and rivers of pure honey. there they will ˹also˺ have all kinds of fruit, and forgiveness from their lord. ˹can they be˺ like those who will stay in the fire forever, left to drink boiling water that will tear apart their insides?
and it is allah who sends the winds, which then stir up ˹vapour, forming˺ clouds, and then we drive them to a lifeless land, giving life to the earth after its death. similar is the resurrection.
i am truly a trustworthy messenger to you.
indeed, we have sent it down as an arabic quran
˹remember˺ when he said to his people, “will you not fear ˹allah˺?
we ordered, “o fire! be cool and safe for abraham!”
it is certainly upon us to ˹make you˺ memorize and recite it.
let them bear their burdens in full on the day of judgment as well as some of the burdens of those they mislead without knowledge. evil indeed is what they will bear!
had we willed, we could have truly shown them to you ˹o prophet˺, and you would have certainly recognized them by their appearance. but you will surely recognize them by their tone of speech. and allah ˹fully˺ knows your doings ˹o people˺.
and the wicked will be in hell,
he is the one who has placed you as successors on earth. so whoever disbelieves will bear ˹the burden of˺ their own disbelief. the disbelievers’ denial only increases them in contempt in the sight of their lord, and it will only contribute to their loss.
then as soon as he removes the hardship from you, a group of you associates ˹others˺ with their lord ˹in worship˺,
you and your ancestors?
as for the earth, we spread it out. how superbly did we smooth it out!
and why should you not spend in the cause of allah, while allah is the ˹sole˺ inheritor of the heavens and the earth? those of you who donated and fought before the victory ˹over mecca˺ are unparalleled. they are far greater in rank than those who donated and fought afterwards. yet allah has promised each a fine reward. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “surely ˹it is˺ my lord ˹who˺ gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever he wills of his servants. and whatever you spend in charity, he will compensate ˹you˺ for it. for he is the best provider.”
alif-lãm-ra. these are the verses of the book, rich in wisdom.
˹can these people be compared to˺ those ˹believers˺ who stand on clear proof from their lord, backed by ˹the quran as˺ a witness from him, and preceded by the book of moses ˹which was revealed˺ as a guide and mercy? it is those ˹believers˺ who have faith in it. but whoever from the ˹disbelieving˺ groups rejects it, the fire will be their destiny. so do not be in doubt of it. it is certainly the truth from your lord, but most people do not believe.
take from their wealth ˹o prophet˺ charity to purify and bless them, and pray for them—surely your prayer is a source of comfort for them. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
reallocating the sanctity of ˹these˺ months is an increase in disbelief, by which the disbelievers are led ˹far˺ astray. they adjust the sanctity one year and uphold it in another, only to maintain the number of months sanctified by allah, violating the very months allah has made sacred. their evil deeds have been made appealing to them. and allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
imagine ˹o prophet˺ if we allowed them enjoyment for years,
he is allah: the creator, the inventor, the shaper. he ˹alone˺ has the most beautiful names. whatever is in the heavens and the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies him. and he is the almighty, all-wise.
but those whose scale is light, they will have doomed themselves, staying in hell forever.
indeed, those who deny allah’s signs, kill the prophets unjustly, and kill people who stand up for justice—give them good news of a painful punishment.
or do they think that we do not hear their ˹evil˺ thoughts and secret talks? yes ˹we do˺! and our messenger-angels are in their presence, recording ˹it all˺.
but the messenger of allah warned them, “˹do not disturb˺ allah’s camel and her ˹turn to˺ drink!”
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “imagine if allah were to take away your hearing or sight, or seal your hearts—who else other than allah could restore it?” see ˹o prophet˺ how we vary the signs, yet they still turn away.
when the inevitable event takes place,
surely the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire—and you will never find for them any helper—
may allah pardon you ˹o prophet˺! why did you give them permission ˹to stay behind˺ before those who told the truth were distinguished from those who were lying?
allah has the most beautiful names. so call upon him by them, and keep away from those who abuse his names. they will be punished for what they used to do.
they responded, “we have come to you with that ˹torment˺ which they have doubted.
and as for those destined to joy, they will be in paradise, staying there forever, as long as the heavens and the earth will endure, except what your lord wills—a ˹generous˺ giving, without end.
when one is touched with hardship, they cry out to their lord, turning to him ˹alone˺. but as soon as he showers them with blessings from him, they ˹totally˺ forget the one they had cried to earlier, and set up equals to allah to mislead ˹others˺ from his way. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “enjoy your disbelief for a little while! you will certainly be one of the inmates of the fire.”
wicked women are for wicked men, and wicked men are for wicked women. and virtuous women are for virtuous men, and virtuous men are for virtuous women. the virtuous are innocent of what the wicked say. they will have forgiveness and an honourable provision.
the disbelievers then threatened their messengers, “we will certainly expel you from our land, unless you return to our faith.” so their lord revealed to them, “we will surely destroy the wrongdoers,
perhaps you ˹o prophet˺ may wish to give up some of what is revealed to you and may be distressed by it because they say, “if only a treasure had been sent down to him, or an angel had come with him!” you are only a warner, and allah is the trustee of all affairs.
they will alternate between its flames and scalding water.
and so they pursued them at sunrise.
even if you were to bring every proof to the people of the book, they would not accept your direction ˹of prayer˺, nor would you accept theirs; nor would any of them accept the direction ˹of prayer˺ of another. and if you were to follow their desires after ˹all˺ the knowledge that has come to you, then you would certainly be one of the wrongdoers.
indeed, allah will fulfil his messenger’s vision in all truth: allah willing, you will surely enter the sacred mosque, in security—˹some with˺ heads shaved and ˹others with˺ hair shortened—without fear.
but this cannot be attained except by those who are patient and who are truly fortunate.
indeed, your lord will decide between them on the day of judgment regarding their differences.
and ˹by˺ those ˹angels˺ fully distinguishing ˹truth from falsehood˺,
or have they mastered some ˹evil˺ plan? then we ˹too˺ are surely planning.
is it not clear to those who take over the land after ˹the destruction of˺ its former residents that—if we will—we can punish them ˹too˺ for their sins and seal their hearts so they will not hear ˹the truth˺?
and if you ˹ever˺ obey a human like yourselves, then you would certainly be losers.
do they ˹really˺ seek to hasten our torment?
they had sought to harm him, but we made them the worst losers.
and the messengers’ time ˹to testify˺ comes up—
who seeks to drive you from your land.” ˹so pharaoh asked,˺ “what do you propose?”
and we had caused him to refuse all wet-nurses at first, so his sister suggested, “shall i direct you to a family who will bring him up for you and take good care of him?”
o believers! do not take my enemies and yours as trusted allies, showing them affection even though they deny what has come to you of the truth. they drove the messenger and yourselves out ˹of mecca˺, simply for your belief in allah, your lord. if you ˹truly˺ emigrated to struggle in my cause and seek my pleasure, ˹then do not take them as allies,˺ disclosing secrets ˹of the believers˺ to the pagans out of affection for them, when i know best whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. and whoever of you does this has truly strayed from the right way.
woe to me! i wish i had never taken so-and-so as a close friend.
they disputed with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as if they were being driven to death with their eyes wide open.
they ask you, ˹o prophet,˺ what is permissible for them ˹to eat˺. say, “what is good and lawful. also what is caught by your hunting animals and birds of prey which you have trained as instructed by allah. so eat what they catch for you, but mention the name of allah over it ˹first˺.” and be mindful of allah. surely allah is swift in reckoning.
say, “the death you are running away from will inevitably come to you. then you will be returned to the knower of the seen and unseen, and he will inform you of what you used to do.”
but once the sacred months have passed, kill the polytheists ˹who violated their treaties˺ wherever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them on every way. but if they repent, perform prayers, and pay alms-tax, then set them free. indeed, allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
when you ˹o prophet˺ recite the quran, we put a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter.
they say, “the most compassionate has offspring.”
and we poured upon them a rain ˹of brimstone˺. how evil was the rain of those who had been warned!
˹remember˺ when the disciples asked, “o jesus, son of mary! would your lord be willing to send down to us a table spread with food from heaven?” jesus answered, “fear allah if you are ˹truly˺ believers.”
so ˹proclaim, o prophet˺: “flee to allah! i am truly sent by him with a clear warning to you.
it is they who have been condemned by allah. and whoever is condemned by allah will have no helper.
˹and˺ ask ˹them˺, “who is the lord of the seven heavens and the lord of the mighty throne?”
and distinguish the ˹true˺ believers and destroy the disbelievers.
exalted is allah, the true king! there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him, the lord of the honourable throne.
and if you ask them who sends down rain from the sky, giving life to the earth after its death, they will surely say, “allah!” say, “praise be to allah!” in fact, most of them do not understand.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “none in the heavens and the earth has knowledge of the unseen except allah. nor do they know when they will be resurrected.
those who divorce their wives in this manner, then ˹wish to˺ retract what they said, must free a slave before they touch each other. this ˹penalty˺ is meant to deter you. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
why do you ˹men˺ lust after fellow men,
or can they benefit or harm you?”
they swear by allah that they never said anything ˹blasphemous˺, while they did in fact utter a blasphemy, lost faith after accepting islam, and plotted what they could not carry out. it is only through resentment that they pay allah and his messenger back for enriching them out of his bounty! if they repent, it will be better for them. but if they turn away, allah will torment them with a painful punishment in this world and the hereafter, and they will have no one on earth to protect or help them.
whose last sip will smell like musk. so let whoever aspires to this strive ˹diligently˺.
had we willed, we could have easily replaced you ˹all˺ with angels, succeeding one another on earth.
while they had already rejected it before, guessing blindly from a place ˹equally˺ far-away ˹from the hereafter˺?
so be mindful of allah to the best of your ability, hear and obey, and spend in charity—that will be best for you. and whoever is saved from the selfishness of their own souls, it is they who are ˹truly˺ successful.
and ˹it warns˺ those who do not believe in the hereafter ˹that˺ we have prepared for them a painful punishment.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “obey allah and his messenger.” if they still turn away, then truly allah does not like the disbelievers.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “in allah’s grace and mercy let them rejoice. that is far better than whatever ˹wealth˺ they amass.”
˹this is˺ a revelation from the most compassionate, most merciful.
relate to them in truth ˹o prophet˺ the story of adam’s two sons—how each offered a sacrifice: abel’s offering was accepted while cain’s was not. so cain threatened, “i will kill you!” his brother replied, “allah only accepts ˹the offering˺ of the sincerely devout.
or ˹their deeds are˺ like the darkness in a deep sea, covered by waves upon waves, topped by ˹dark˺ clouds. darkness upon darkness! if one stretches out their hand, they can hardly see it. and whoever allah does not bless with light will have no light!
say, “he ˹alone˺ has the power to unleash upon you a torment from above or below you or split you into ˹conflicting˺ factions and make you taste the violence of one another.” see how we vary the signs, so perhaps they will comprehend.
indeed, those in awe of their lord without seeing him will have forgiveness and a mighty reward.
o believers! it is not permissible for you to inherit women against their will treat them fairly. if you happen to dislike them, you may hate something which allah turns into a great blessing.
still people want to deny what is yet to come,
your lord has proclaimed, “call upon me, i will respond to you. surely those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell, fully humbled.”
˹this is the truth,˺ yet the disbelievers are ˹entrenched˺ in arrogance and opposition.
yet the disbelievers will persist in doubt about this ˹revelation˺ until the hour takes them by surprise, or the torment of a terminating day comes to them.
and ˹the men of˺ his people—who were used to shameful deeds—came to him rushing. he pleaded, “o my people! here are my daughters ˹for marriage˺—they are pure for you. so fear allah, and do not humiliate me by disrespecting my guests. is there not ˹even˺ a single right-minded man among you?”
another sign for them is that we carried their ancestors ˹with noah˺ in the fully loaded ark,
and allah ˹alone˺ spread out the earth for you
then on top of that they will be given a blend of boiling drink.
˹then˺ solomon said, “disguise her throne for her so we may see whether she will recognize ˹it˺ or she will not be able to.”
it was that ˹false˺ assumption you entertained about your lord that has brought about your doom, so you have become losers.”
every matter, small and large, is written ˹precisely˺.
˹the hypocrites are˺ those who wait to see what happens to you. so if allah grants you victory, they say ˹to you˺, “were we not on your side?” but if the disbelievers have a share ˹of victory˺, they say ˹to them˺, “did we not have the advantage over you, yet we protected you from the believers?” allah will judge between ˹all of˺ you on the day of judgment. and allah will never grant the disbelievers a way over the believers.
the hour is sure to come. my will is to keep it hidden, so that every soul may be rewarded according to their efforts.
i am not going to expel the believers.
allah would not leave the believers in the condition you were in, until he distinguished the good from the evil ˹among you˺. nor would allah ˹directly˺ reveal to you the unseen, but he chooses whoever he wills as a messenger. so believe in allah and his messengers. and if you are faithful and mindful ˹of allah˺, you will receive a great reward.
so if they argue with you ˹o prophet˺, say, “i have submitted myself to allah, and so have my followers.” and ask those who were given the scripture and the illiterate ˹people˺, “have you submitted yourselves ˹to allah˺?” if they submit, they will be ˹rightly˺ guided. but if they turn away, then your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. and allah is all-seeing of ˹his˺ servants.
it is only a revelation sent down ˹to him˺.
do not do a favour expecting more ˹in return˺.
and those blowing violently,
satan only makes them ˹false˺ promises and deludes them with ˹empty˺ hopes. truly satan promises them nothing but delusion.
so we seized him and his soldiers, casting them into the sea while he was blameworthy.
causing the shade to retreat gradually?
those who were warned, “your enemies have mobilized their forces against you, so fear them,” the warning only made them grow stronger in faith and they replied, “allah ˹alone˺ is sufficient ˹as an aid˺ for us and ˹he˺ is the best protector.”
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary, signalling to them to glorify ˹allah˺ morning and evening.
when the wrongdoers sensed ˹the arrival of˺ our torment, they started to run away from their cities.
they are the ones who say ˹to one another˺, “do not spend ˹anything˺ on those ˹emigrants˺ with the messenger of allah so that they will break away ˹from him˺.” but to allah ˹alone˺ belong the treasuries of the heavens and the earth, yet the hypocrites do not comprehend.
and elias was indeed one of the messengers.
there will be some among you who will lag behind so that if you face a disaster, they will say, “allah has blessed us for not being there among them.”
whatever mercy allah opens up for people, none can withhold it. and whatever he withholds, none but him can release it. for he is the almighty, all-wise.
they do not honour the bonds of kinship or treaties with the believers. it is they who are the transgressors.
and there are some who worship allah on the verge ˹of faith˺: if they are blessed with something good, they are content with it; but if they are afflicted with a trial, they relapse ˹into disbelief˺, losing this world and the hereafter. that is ˹truly˺ the clearest loss.
allah will judge between you ˹all˺ on judgment day regarding your differences.
and we have placed in it gardens of palm trees and grapevines, and caused springs to gush forth in it,
and we blessed him ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
and those who were mindful of their lord will be led to paradise in ˹successive˺ groups. when they arrive at its ˹already˺ open gates, its keepers will say, “peace be upon you! you have done well, so come in, to stay forever.”
indeed, those against whom allah’s decree ˹of torment˺ is justified will not believe—
i will never worship what you worship,
and doomed is the one who corrupts it!
certainly to allah ˹alone˺ belong all those in the heavens and all those on the earth. and what do those who associate others with allah really follow? they follow nothing but assumptions and do nothing but lie.
o joseph! forget about this. and you ˹o wife˺! seek forgiveness for your sin. it certainly has been your fault.”
˹this has been˺ our way with the messengers we sent before you. and you will never find any change in our way.
do not be like those ˹pagans˺ who left their homes arrogantly, only to be seen by people and to hinder others from allah’s path. and allah is fully aware of what they do.
you gave him your ˹undivided˺ attention,
˹we sent them˺ with clear proofs and divine books. and we have sent down to you ˹o prophet˺ the reminder, so that you may explain to people what has been revealed for them, and perhaps they will reflect.
and if you ˹o prophet˺ see signs of betrayal by a people, respond by openly terminating your treaty with them. surely allah does not like those who betray.
and from the evil of the night when it grows dark,
˹watch for˺ the day the heavens will burst with clouds, and the angels will be sent down in successive ranks.
alif-lãm-ra. these are the verses of the clear book.
whatever ˹idols˺ they used to invoke besides allah will fail them. and they will realize that they will have no escape.
indeed, we used to call upon him ˹alone˺ before. he is truly the most kind, most merciful.”
they replied, “glory be to our lord! we have truly been wrongdoers.”
ask ˹them, o prophet˺, “imagine if this ˹quran˺ is ˹truly˺ from allah and you deny it: who can be more astray than those who have gone too far in opposition ˹to the truth˺?”
give good news of a painful punishment to hypocrites,
he is the one who enables you to travel through land and sea. and it so happens that you are on ships, sailing with a favourable wind, to the passengers’ delight. suddenly, the ships are overcome by a gale wind and those on board are overwhelmed by waves from every side, and they assume they are doomed. they cry out to allah ˹alone˺ in sincere devotion, “if you save us from this, we will certainly be grateful.”
and surely you are calling them to the straight path,
and what will make you realize what the striking disaster is?
for her to be spared the punishment, she must swear four times by allah that he is telling a lie,
and we admitted him into our mercy, ˹for˺ he was truly one of the righteous.
and there is none comparable to him.”
and for boasting, “we killed the messiah, jesus, son of mary, the messenger of allah.” but they neither killed nor crucified him—it was only made to appear so. even those who argue for this ˹crucifixion˺ are in doubt. they have no knowledge whatsoever—only making assumptions. they certainly did not kill him.
he was only a servant we showed favour to, and made as an example for the children of israel.
˹he will also give you˺ another favour that you long for: help from allah and an imminent victory. ˹so˺ give good news ˹o prophet˺ to the believers.
no intercession will be of any benefit with him, except by those granted permission by him. ˹at last,˺ when the dread ˹of judgment day˺ is relieved from their hearts ˹because they are permitted to intercede˺, they will ˹excitedly˺ ask ˹the angels˺, “what has your lord ˹just˺ said?” the angels will reply, “the truth! and he is the most high, all-great.”
nor is it the mumbling of a fortune-teller, ˹yet˺ you are hardly mindful.
likewise, ˹we guided˺ zachariah, john, jesus, and elias, who were all of the righteous.
the disbelievers vow, “we will never believe in this quran, nor in those ˹scriptures˺ before it.” if only you could see when the wrongdoers will be detained before their lord, throwing blame at each other! the lowly ˹followers˺ will say to the arrogant ˹leaders˺, “had it not been for you, we would certainly have been believers.”
they wish to extinguish allah’s light with their mouths, but allah will ˹certainly˺ perfect his light, even to the dismay of the disbelievers.
˹and said,˺ “these ˹outcasts˺ are just a handful of people,
a drink ˹of pure wine˺ will be passed around to them from a flowing stream:
then the wrongdoers will be told, “taste the torment of eternity! are you not rewarded except for what you used to commit?”
those who pay alms-tax;
˹consider the day˺ when those who misled others will disown their followers—when they face the torment—and the bonds that united them will be cut off.
and when our messenger-angels came to lot, he was distressed and worried by their arrival. they reassured ˹him˺, “do not fear, nor grieve. we will surely deliver you and your family—except your wife, who is one of the doomed.
weigh with justice, and do not give short measure.
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies allah. the kingdom is his, and all praise is for him. for he is most capable of everything.
this is allah’s creation. now show me what those ˹gods˺ other than him have created. in fact, the wrongdoers are clearly astray.
and ˹remember˺ when lot rebuked ˹the men of˺ his people: “you certainly commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before you.
he is the one who showers his blessings upon you—and his angels pray for you—so that he may bring you out of darkness and into light. for he is ever merciful to the believers.
certainly you ˹disbelievers˺ and whatever you worship instead of allah will be the fuel of hell. you are ˹all˺ bound to enter it.
surely those who deny allah and his messengers and wish to make a distinction between allah and his messengers, saying, “we believe in some and disbelieve in others,” desiring to forge a compromise,
he will forgive your sins, and delay your end until the appointed time. indeed, when the time set by allah comes, it cannot be delayed, if only you knew!”
wherever you are ˹o prophet˺, turn your face towards the sacred mosque. this is certainly the truth from your lord. and allah is never unaware of what you ˹all˺ do.
say, “show me those ˹idols˺ you have joined with him as partners. no! in fact, he ˹alone˺ is allah—the almighty, all-wise.”
we recite ˹all˺ this to you ˹o prophet˺ as one of the signs and ˹as˺ a wise reminder.
these ˹believers˺ will be given a double reward for their perseverance, responding to evil with good, and for donating from what we have provided for them.
when the prayers are over, remember allah—whether you are standing, sitting, or lying down. but when you are secure, establish regular prayers. indeed, performing prayers is a duty on the believers at the appointed times.
˹they are˺ those who spend ˹a good portion of˺ the night, prostrating themselves and standing before their lord.
we certainly help our messengers and the believers, ˹both˺ in this worldly life and on the day the witnesses will stand forth ˹for testimony˺—
is there any reward for goodness except goodness?
surely ˹the fruit of˺ the tree of zaqqûm
and indeed, you ˹o prophet˺ are receiving the quran from the one ˹who is˺ all-wise, all-knowing.
to bring you every clever magician.”
moses said, “o my people! if you do believe in allah and submit ˹to his will˺, then put your trust in him.”
whether you reveal something or conceal it, surely allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.
moses replied, “i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning.”
and ˹remember˺ when we said, “enter this city and eat freely from wherever you please; enter the gate with humility, saying, ‘absolve us.’ we will forgive your sins and multiply the reward for the good-doers.”
obeying its lord as it must,
he had already warned them of our ˹crushing˺ blow but they disputed the warnings.
and surely we had shown you favour before,
had we not made you steadfast, you probably would have inclined to them a little,
whoever allah guides is truly guided. and whoever he leaves to stray, they are the ˹true˺ losers.
other messengers had already been ridiculed before you, but i delayed the disbelievers ˹for a while˺ then seized them. and how ˹horrible˺ was my punishment!
say ˹to them, o prophet˺, “each ˹of us˺ is waiting, so keep waiting! you will soon know who is on the straight path and is ˹rightly˺ guided.”
o my sons! go and search ˹diligently˺ for joseph and his brother. and do not lose hope in the mercy of allah, for no one loses hope in allah’s mercy except those with no faith.”
and ˹remember when˺ we shaded you with clouds and sent down to you manna and quails, ˹saying˺, “eat from the good things we have provided for you.” the evildoers ˹certainly˺ did not wrong us, but wronged themselves.
it is not appropriate for a prophet to illegally withhold spoils of war. and whoever does so, it will be held against them on the day of judgment. then every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be wronged.
and so he and his soldiers behaved arrogantly in the land with no right, thinking they would never be returned to us.
but no! by the moon,
then his lord chose him, making him one of the righteous.
some said, “we heard a young man, called abraham, speaking ˹ill˺ of them.”
so let them indulge ˹in falsehood˺ and amuse ˹themselves˺ until they face their day, which they have been warned of.
condemned are the makers of the ditch—
they have taken other gods, instead of allah, seeking strength ˹and protection˺ through them.
that is your lord’s path—perfectly straight. we have already made the signs clear to those who are mindful.
˹the disbelievers will be told,˺ “proceed into that ˹fire˺ which you used to deny!
˹we let you know this˺ so that you neither grieve over what you have missed nor boast over what he has granted you. for allah does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful—
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “bring your witnesses who can testify that allah has forbidden this.” if they ˹falsely˺ testify, do not testify with them. and do not follow the desires of those who deny our proofs, disbelieve in the hereafter, and set up equals with their lord.
as for those who dispute about allah after he is ˹already˺ acknowledged ˹by many˺, their argument is futile in the sight of their lord. upon them is wrath, and they will suffer a severe punishment.
do you not see how allah compares a good word to a good tree? its root is firm and its branches reach the sky,
indeed, those who believe and do good will have the gardens of paradise as an accommodation,
whatever loans you give, ˹only˺ seeking interest at the expense of people’s wealth will not increase with allah. but whatever charity you give, ˹only˺ seeking the pleasure of allah—it is they whose reward will be multiplied.
our lord! do not subject us to the persecution of the disbelievers. forgive us, our lord! you ˹alone˺ are truly the almighty, all-wise.”
this is no more than the word of a man.”
so turn away from them, and wait! they too are waiting.
so that he will reward them in full and increase them out of his grace. he is truly all-forgiving, most appreciative.
on that day, we will let them and we will gather all ˹people˺ together.
today all good, pure foods have been made lawful for you. similarly, the food of the people of the book is permissible for you and yours is permissible for them. and ˹permissible for you in marriage˺ are chaste believing women as well as chaste women of those given the scripture before you—as long as you pay them their dowries in wedlock, neither fornicating nor taking them as mistresses. and whoever rejects the faith, all their good deeds will be void ˹in this life˺ and in the hereafter they will be among the losers.
when you ˹believers˺ are touched with good, they grieve; but when you are afflicted with evil, they rejoice. ˹yet,˺ if you are patient and mindful ˹of allah˺, their schemes will not harm you in the least. surely allah is fully aware of what they do.
and ˹the ships˺ gliding with ease,
they had already sought to spread discord before and devised every ˹possible˺ plot against you ˹o prophet˺, until the truth came and allah’s will prevailed—much to their dismay.
you certainly wished ˹for the opportunity˺ for martyrdom before encountering it, now you have seen it with your own eyes.
that is why we ordained for the children of israel that whoever takes a life—unless as a punishment for murder or mischief in the land—it will be as if they killed all of humanity; and whoever saves a life, it will be as if they saved all of humanity. ˹although˺ our messengers already came to them with clear proofs, many of them still transgressed afterwards through the land.
so that we may make this a reminder to you, and that attentive ears may grasp it.
we admitted them into our mercy, for they were truly of the righteous.
and act so viciously when you attack ˹others˺?
for they used to be prideful among their people,
indeed, those who love to see indecency spread among the believers will suffer a painful punishment in this life and the hereafter. allah knows and you do not know.
they will say, “before ˹this reward˺ we used to be in awe ˹of allah˺ in the midst of our people.
do you not see that allah causes the night to merge into the day and the day into the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term, and that allah is all-aware of what you do?
this is how we allow denial ˹to steep˺ into the hearts of the wicked.
they will all appear before allah, and the lowly ˹followers˺ will appeal to the arrogant ˹leaders˺, “we were your ˹dedicated˺ followers, so will you ˹then˺ protect us from allah’s torment in any way?” they will reply, “had allah guided us, we would have guided you. ˹now˺ it is all the same for us whether we suffer patiently or impatiently, there is no escape for us.”
˹imagine˺ how many gardens and springs the tyrants left behind,
eat of the good, lawful things provided to you by allah. and be mindful of allah in whom you believe.
their prophet further told them, “the sign of saul’s kingship is that the ark will come to you—containing reassurance which will be carried by the angels. surely in this is a sign for you, if you ˹truly˺ believe.”
and allah made this a sign of victory and reassurance to your hearts. victory comes only from allah. surely allah is almighty, all-wise.
and when they hear news of security or fear, they publicize it. had they referred it to the messenger or their authorities, those with sound judgment among them would have validated it. had it not been for allah’s grace and mercy, you would have followed satan—except for a few.
most certainly, the one who has ordained the quran for you will ˹ultimately˺ bring you back home ˹to mecca˺. say, “my lord knows best who has come with ˹true˺ guidance and who is clearly astray.”
do not be like those who say, “we hear,” but in fact they are not listening.
when it is said to them, “come! the messenger of allah will pray for you to be forgiven,” they turn their heads ˹in disgust˺, and you see them ˹o prophet˺ turn away in arrogance.
and seek help through patience and prayer. indeed, it is a burden except for the humble—
also ˹we destroyed˺ ’ȃd, thamûd, and the people of the water-pit, as well as many peoples in between.
˹you would have suffered,˺ had it not been for allah’s grace and mercy upon you, and had allah not been accepting of repentance, all-wise.
then they ˹quickly˺ regressed to their ˹original˺ mind-set, ˹arguing,˺ “you already know that those ˹idols˺ cannot talk.”
where they will be forever, never desiring anywhere else.
or do they say, “he has fabricated this ˹quran˺!”? say, ˹o prophet,˺ “produce ten fabricated sûrahs like it and seek help from whoever you can—other than allah—if what you say is true!”
we have ordained death for ˹all of˺ you, and we cannot be prevented
and ˹remember˺ when moses said to his young assistant, “i will never give up until i reach the junction of the two seas, even if i travel for ages.”
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them. and whoever trades allah’s favour—after receiving it—˹for disbelief˺ should know that allah is indeed severe in punishment.
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far off.
as there are within yourselves. can you not see?
and glorify him morning and evening.
except his wife. we have determined that she will be one of the doomed.”
and say, ‘would you ˹be willing to˺ purify yourself,
indeed, you ˹o prophet˺ are not responsible whatsoever for those who have divided their faith and split into sects. their judgment rests only with allah. and he will inform them of what they used to do.
the people of noah rejected the messengers
one’s ˹devilish˺ associate will say, “our lord! i did not make them transgress. rather, they were far astray ˹on their own˺.”
similarly, we made enemies for every prophet from among the wicked, but sufficient is your lord as a guide and helper.
indeed, there have come to you insights from your lord. so whoever chooses to see, it is for their own good. but whoever chooses to be blind, it is to their own loss. and i am not a keeper over you.
indeed, the righteous will be amid gardens and springs.
hell, where they will burn. what an evil place to rest!
˹o believers!˺ march forth whether it is easy or difficult for you, and strive with your wealth and your lives in the cause of allah. that is best for you, if only you knew.
alif-lãm-ra. ˹this is˺ a book which we have revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ so that you may lead people out of darkness and into light, by the will of their lord, to the path of the almighty, the praiseworthy—
the disbelievers advised ˹one another˺, “do not listen to this quran but drown it out so that you may prevail.”
when the sky splits open,
have you seen ˹o prophet˺ the one who has taken their own desires as their god? will you then be a keeper over them?
yet the people have divided it into sects. but to us they will all return.
and ˹they will have˺ maidens with gorgeous eyes,
˹they are˺ those who donate in prosperity and adversity, control their anger, and pardon others. and allah loves the good-doers.
we will certainly make them taste some of the minor torment ˹in this life˺ before the major torment ˹of the hereafter˺, so perhaps they will return ˹to the right path˺.
˹he is˺ the one who created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six days, then established himself on the throne. ˹he is˺ the most compassionate! ask ˹none other than˺ the all-knowledgeable about himself.
who is it that will lend to allah a good loan which allah will multiply ˹many times over˺ for them, and they will have an honourable reward?
call upon your lord humbly and secretly. surely he does not like the transgressors.
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and compelling proof
and placed it before them, asking, “will you not eat?”
then he slipped off to his family and brought a fat ˹roasted˺ calf,
give women ˹you wed˺ their due dowries graciously. but if they waive some of it willingly, then you may enjoy it freely with a clear conscience.
allah will respond, “do not dispute in my presence, since i had already given you a warning.
so pharaoh and his people were defeated right there and put to shame.
the people of lot rejected the messengers
and if we had sent an angel, we would have certainly made it ˹assume the form of˺ a man—leaving them more confused than they already are.
surely allah condemns the disbelievers, and has prepared for them a blazing fire,
and those who come after them will pray, “our lord! forgive us and our fellow believers who preceded us in faith, and do not allow bitterness into our hearts towards those who believe. our lord! indeed, you are ever gracious, most merciful.”
as for the disbelievers, even if they were to possess everything in the world twice over ˹and offer it all˺ to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of judgment, it would never be accepted from them. and they will suffer a painful punishment.
when the hypocrites come to you ˹o prophet˺, they say, “we bear witness that you are certainly the messenger of allah”—and surely allah knows that you are his messenger—but allah bears witness that the hypocrites are truly liars.
how ˹horrible˺ will it be if a disaster strikes them because of what their hands have done, then they come to you swearing by allah, “we intended nothing but goodwill and reconciliation.”
and that our forces will certainly prevail.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “if your parents and children and siblings and spouses and extended family and the wealth you have acquired and the trade you fear will decline and the homes you cherish—˹if all these˺ are more beloved to you than allah and his messenger and struggling in his way, then wait until allah brings about his will. allah does not guide the rebellious people.”
weigh with an even balance,
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back to sea once again, and send upon you a violent storm, drowning you for your denial? then you will find none to avenge you against us.
and the mountains will be blown away entirely.
among the believers are men who have proven true to what they pledged to allah. some of them have fulfilled their pledge ˹with their lives˺, others are waiting ˹their turn˺. they have never changed ˹their commitment˺ in the least.
so whoever does good and is a believer will never be denied ˹the reward for˺ their striving, for we are recording it all.
and ˹on judgment day˺ allah will say, “o jesus, son of mary! did you ever ask the people to worship you and your mother as gods besides allah?” he will answer, “glory be to you! how could i ever say what i had no right to say? if i had said such a thing, you would have certainly known it. you know what is ˹hidden˺ within me, but i do not know what is within you. indeed, you ˹alone˺ are the knower of all unseen.
and on the day the hour will arrive, the wicked will swear that they did not stay ˹in this world˺ more than an hour. in this way they were always deluded ˹in the world˺.
your lord creates and chooses whatever he wills—the choice is not theirs. glorified and exalted is allah above what they associate ˹with him˺!
still they have taken other gods besides allah, hoping to be helped ˹by them˺.
a male fornicator would only marry a female fornicator or idolatress. and a female fornicator would only be married to a fornicator or idolater. this is ˹all˺ forbidden to the believers.
if we give people a taste of mercy, they become prideful ˹because˺ of it. but if they are afflicted with an evil for what their hands have done, they instantly fall into despair.
so we inflicted punishment upon them. the ruins of both nations still lie on a well-known road.
and “peace!” will be ˹their˺ greeting from the merciful lord.
o prophet! we have made lawful for you your wives to whom you have paid their ˹full˺ dowries as well as those ˹bondwomen˺ in your possession, whom allah has granted you. we know well what ˹rulings˺ we have ordained for the believers in relation to their wives and those ˹bondwomen˺ in their possession. as such, there would be no blame on you. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
and that is not difficult for allah ˹at all˺.
had they been patient until you could come out to them, it would have certainly been better for them. and allah is all-forgiving, most merciful.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i call only upon my lord, associating none with him ˹in worship˺.”
˹still˺ they ask ˹the believers˺, “when will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
it is up to you ˹o prophet˺ to delay or receive whoever you please of your wives. there is no blame on you if you call back any of those you have set aside. that is more likely that they will be content, not grieved, and satisfied with what you offer them all. allah ˹fully˺ knows what is in your hearts. and allah is all-knowing, most forbearing.
he placed on the earth firm mountains, standing high, showered his blessings upon it, and ordained ˹all˺ its means of sustenance—totaling four days exactly—for all who ask.
sailing under our ˹watchful˺ eyes—a ˹fair˺ punishment on behalf of the one ˹they˺ denied.
˹saying,˺ “eat from the good things we have provided for you, but do not transgress in them, or my wrath will befall you. and whoever my wrath befalls is certainly doomed.
as well as ˹various˺ crops and splendid residences,
now put your hand through ˹the opening of˺ your collar, it will come out ˹shining˺ white, unblemished. they have truly been a rebellious people.”
but whoever seeks beyond that are the transgressors;
surely those who pledge allegiance to you ˹o prophet˺ are actually pledging allegiance to allah. allah’s hand is over theirs. whoever breaks their pledge, it will only be to their own loss. and whoever fulfils their pledge to allah, he will grant them a great reward.
as well as purity and compassion from us. and he was god-fearing,
if some of you do believe in what i have been sent with while others do not, then be patient until allah judges between us. he is the best of judges.”
have you ˹o prophet˺ not seen those who were given a portion of the scriptures yet believe in idols and false gods and reassure the disbelievers that they are better guided than the believers?
o prophet! allah is sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you.
that is so. and whoever retaliates in equivalence to the injury they have received, and then are wronged ˹again˺, allah will certainly help them. surely allah is ever-pardoning, all-forgiving.
o humanity! there has come to you conclusive evidence from your lord. and we have sent down to you a brilliant light.
and whoever defies the messenger after guidance has become clear to them and follows a path other than that of the believers, we will let them pursue what they have chosen, then burn them in hell—what an evil end!
and they will say, “praise be to allah, who has kept away from us all ˹causes of˺ sorrow. our lord is indeed all-forgiving, most appreciative.
˹it is˺ allah ˹who˺ calls back the souls ˹of people˺ upon their death as well as ˹the souls˺ of the living during their sleep. then he keeps those for whom he has ordained death, and releases the others until ˹their˺ appointed time. surely in this are signs for people who reflect.
that is allah—your lord! there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except him. ˹he is˺ the creator of all things, so worship him ˹alone˺. and he is the maintainer of everything.
˹they are˺ totally unwilling to assist you. when danger comes, you see them staring at you with their eyes rolling like someone in the throes of death. but once the danger is over, they slash you with razor-sharp tongues, ravenous for ˹worldly˺ gains. such people have not ˹truly˺ believed, so allah has rendered their deeds void. and that is easy for allah.
whoever hopes for the meeting with allah, ˹let them know that˺ allah’s appointed time is sure to come. he is the all-hearing, all-knowing.
˹this is˺ a blessed book which we have revealed to you ˹o prophet˺ so that they may contemplate its verses, and people of reason may be mindful.
allah commands you regarding your children: the share of the male will be twice that of the female. ˹this is˺ an obligation from allah. surely allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
these are allah’s revelations which we recite to you ˹o prophet˺ in truth. and you are truly one of the messengers.
the misled will say, “it was you who deluded us away from what is right.”
urging ˹their followers˺, ‘do not abandon your idols—especially wadd, suwa’, yaghûth, ya’ûq, and nasr.’
but when such a person comes to us, one will say ˹to their associate˺, “i wish you were as distant from me as the east is from the west! what an evil associate ˹you were˺!”
it will be sealed over them,
there is not any means ˹of sustenance˺ whose reserves we do not hold, only bringing it forth in precise measure.
also, you find in them ˹other˺ benefits. and by means of them you may reach destinations you desire. and you are carried upon ˹some of˺ them and upon ships.
but to worship me ˹alone˺? this is the straight path.
even if we had sent them the angels, made the dead speak to them, and assembled before their own eyes every sign ˹they demanded˺, they still would not have believed—unless allah so willed. but most of them are ignorant ˹of this˺.
that ˹reward˺ is the good news which allah gives to his servants who believe and do good. say, ˹o prophet,˺ “i do not ask you for a reward for this ˹message˺—only honour for ˹our˺ kinship.” whoever earns a good deed, we will increase it in goodness for them. surely allah is all-forgiving, most appreciative.
and this secure city ˹of mecca˺!
all it took was one ˹mighty˺ blast, and they were extinguished at once.
we have never heard of this in the previous faith. this is nothing but a fabrication.
did he not find you unguided then guided you?
say, “allah has the most conclusive argument. had it been his will, he would have easily imposed guidance upon all of you.”
we did not wrong them, but it was they who were the wrongdoers.
he conducts every affair from the heavens to the earth, then it all ascends to him on a day whose length is a thousand years by your counting.
those who rejected shu’aib were ˹wiped out˺ as if they had never lived there. those who rejected shu’aib were the true losers.
do you think you will enter paradise without allah proving which of you ˹truly˺ struggled ˹for his cause˺ and patiently endured?
and he had no manpower to help him against allah, nor could he ˹even˺ help himself.
and if you turn away, ˹remember˺ i have never demanded a reward from you ˹for delivering the message˺. my reward is only from allah. and i have been commanded to be one of those who submit ˹to allah˺.”
˹remember˺ when abraham was tested by his lord with ˹certain˺ commandments, which he fulfilled. allah said, “i will certainly make you into a role model for the people.” abraham asked, “what about my offspring?” allah replied, “my covenant is not extended to the wrongdoers.”
they have not shown allah the reverence he deserves. surely allah is all-powerful, almighty.
and the mountains—how they were firmly set up;
so i fled from you when i feared you. then my lord granted me wisdom and made me one of the messengers.
they glory be to him! in fact, to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth—all are subject to his will.
so we plagued them with floods, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood—all as clear signs, but they persisted in arrogance and were a wicked people.
so believe in allah and his messenger and in the light we have revealed. and allah is all-aware of what you do.
so eat only of what is slaughtered in allah’s name if you truly believe in his revelations.
then after him we sent ˹other˺ messengers to their ˹own˺ people and they came to them with clear proofs. but they would not believe in what they had rejected before. this is how we seal the hearts of the transgressors.
in each will be two types of every fruit.
and caused the earth to burst with springs, so the waters met for a fate already set.
so the truth prevailed and their illusions failed.
but allah would never punish them while you ˹o prophet˺ were in their midst. nor would he ever punish them if they prayed for forgiveness.
boasting, “i have wasted enormous wealth!”?
they are ˹wilfully˺ deaf, dumb, and blind, so they will never return ˹to the right path˺.
there they will be reclining on ˹canopied˺ couches, never seeing scorching heat or bitter cold.
in a well-preserved record,
can the one who creates be equal to those who do not? will you not then be mindful?
have you not seen those ˹disbelievers˺ who meet allah’s favours with ingratitude and lead their own people to their doom?
and when the messengers despaired and their people thought the messengers had been denied help, our help came to them ˹at last˺. we then saved whoever we willed, and our punishment is never averted from the wicked people.
˹as˺ a provision for ˹our˺ servants. and with this ˹rain˺ we revive a lifeless land. similar is the emergence ˹from the graves˺.
˹pray˺ half the night, or a little less,
when the caravan departed ˹from egypt˺, their father said ˹to those around him˺, “you may think i am senile, but i certainly sense the smell of joseph.”
and do not set up another god with allah. i am truly sent by him with a clear warning to you.”
and to the people of midian we sent their brother shu’aib. he said, “o my people! worship allah—you have no other god except him. a clear proof has already come to you from your lord. so give just measure and weight, do not defraud people of their property, nor spread corruption in the land after it has been set in order. this is for your own good, if you are ˹truly˺ believers.
surely those who do not believe in allah’s revelations will never be guided by allah, and they will suffer a painful punishment.
and when pregnant camels are left untended,
stemming from between the backbone and the ribcage.
when it is said to them, “follow what allah has revealed,” they reply, “no! we ˹only˺ follow what we found our forefathers practicing.” ˹would they still do so,˺ even if their forefathers had ˹absolutely˺ no understanding or guidance?
and gathered and hoarded ˹wealth˺.
o believers! do not forbid the good things which allah has made lawful for you, and do not transgress. indeed, allah does not like transgressors.
and by the night and whatever it envelops!
indeed your lord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then established himself on the throne. he makes the day and night overlap in rapid succession. he created the sun, the moon, and the stars—all subjected by his command. the creation and the command belong to him ˹alone˺. blessed is allah—lord of all worlds!
so seek your lord’s forgiveness and turn to him in repentance. surely my lord is most merciful, all-loving.”
he replied, “so will it be! your lord says, ‘it is easy for me. and so will we make him a sign for humanity and a mercy from us.’ it is a matter ˹already˺ decreed.”
those ˹misleaders˺ against whom the decree ˹of torment˺ is justified will cry, “our lord! these ˹followers˺ are the ones we caused to deviate. we led them into deviance, for we ourselves were deviant. we disassociate ourselves ˹from them˺ before you. it was not us that they used to worship.”
so ˹always˺ remind ˹with the quran˺—˹even˺ if the reminder is beneficial ˹only to some˺.
pharaoh said to those around him, “did you hear ˹what he said˺?”
there are some of them who listen to you ˹o prophet˺, but when they depart from you, they say ˹mockingly˺ to those ˹believers˺ gifted with knowledge, “what did he just say?” these are the ones whose hearts allah has sealed and who ˹only˺ follow their desires.
nor a close friend.
losers indeed are those who deny the meeting with allah until the hour takes them by surprise, then they will cry, “woe to us for having ignored this!” they will bear ˹the burden of˺ their sins on their backs. evil indeed is their burden!
when the two groups came face to face, the companions of moses cried out, “we are overtaken for sure.”
we did not send ˹messengers˺ before you ˹o prophet˺ except mere men inspired by us. if you ˹polytheists˺ do not know ˹this already˺, then ask those who have knowledge ˹of the scriptures˺.
behaving arrogantly in the land and plotting evil. but evil plotting only backfires on those who plot. are they awaiting anything but the fate of those ˹destroyed˺ before? you will find no change in the way of allah, nor will you find it diverted ˹to someone else˺.
they will enter the gardens of eternity, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing will be silk.
our lord! you certainly know what we conceal and what we reveal. nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from allah.
do you not see how allah created seven heavens, one above the other,
and the example of those who donate their wealth, seeking allah’s pleasure and believing the reward is certain, is that of a garden on a fertile hill: when heavy rain falls, it yields up twice its normal produce. if no heavy rain falls, a drizzle is sufficient. and allah is all-seeing of what you do.
we called him from the right side of mount ṭûr, and drew him near, speaking ˹with him˺ directly.
˹as for˺ those who believe and do good, we will certainly house them in ˹elevated˺ mansions in paradise, under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. how excellent is the reward for those who work ˹righteousness!˺—
they will have whatever they desire with their lord. that is the reward of the good-doers.
they insisted, “there is nothing beyond this worldly life and we will never be resurrected.”
so let whoever wills be mindful of it.
if you do not march forth, he will afflict you with a painful torment and replace you with other people. you are not harming him in the least. and allah is most capable of everything.
but whoever disbelieves, do not let their disbelief grieve you ˹o prophet˺. to us is their return, and we will inform them of all they did. surely allah knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
it is from these ˹people˺ that we will accept the good they did, and overlook their misdeeds—along with the residents of paradise, ˹in fulfilment of˺ the true promise they have been given.
the people of thamûd rejected the messengers
you have your way, and i have my way.”
indeed, this quran clarifies for the children of israel most of what they differ over.
and persevere for ˹the sake of˺ your lord.
and you will see every faith-community on its knees. every community will be summoned to its record ˹of deeds˺. ˹they all will be told,˺ “this day you will be rewarded for what you used to do.
if we willed, we could make it salty. will you not then give thanks?
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “will i take any guardian other than allah, the originator of the heavens and the earth, who provides for all and is not in need of provision?” say, “i have been commanded to be the first to submit and not be one of the polytheists.”
their only cry—when overwhelmed by our torment—was, “we have indeed been wrongdoers.”
and allah will deliver those who were mindful ˹of him˺ to their place of ˹ultimate˺ triumph. no evil will touch them, nor will they grieve.
we never sent a messenger before you ˹o prophet˺ without revealing to him: “there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except me, so worship me ˹alone˺.”
who pray, “our lord! we have believed, so forgive our sins and protect us from the torment of the fire.”
do they desire a way other than allah’s—knowing that all those in the heavens and the earth submit to his will, willingly or unwillingly, and to him they will ˹all˺ be returned?
be gracious, enjoin what is right, and turn away from those who act ignorantly.
but those whose scale is light, they have doomed themselves for wrongfully denying our signs.
those who patiently endure, and put their trust in their lord!
not a ˹single˺ society we destroyed before them ever believed ˹after receiving the signs˺. will these ˹pagans˺ then believe?
˹for˺ he was truly one of our faithful servants.
and whoever does this sinfully and unjustly, we will burn them in the fire. that is easy for allah.
and we made in it means of sustenance for you and others, who you do not provide for.
then we raised another generation after them,
˹remember˺ when they entered his presence and greeted ˹him with˺, “peace!” he replied, “peace ˹be upon you˺!” ˹then he said to himself,˺ “˹these are˺ an unfamiliar people.”
yet there are others who say, “our lord! grant us the good of this world and the hereafter, and protect us from the torment of the fire.”
ask them ˹o prophet˺ if your lord has daughters, while the pagans ˹prefer to˺ have sons.
and when it is said to them, “what has your lord revealed?” they say, “ancient fables!”
and so we vary our signs to the extent that they will say, “you have studied ˹previous scriptures˺,” and we make this ˹quran˺ clear for people who know.
to carve homes in the mountains with great skill?
but when our enlightening signs came to them, they said, “this is pure magic.”
and you would have seen the sun, as it rose, inclining away from their cave to the right, and as it set, declining away from them to the left, while they lay in its open space. that is one of the signs of allah. whoever allah guides is truly guided. but whoever he leaves to stray, you will never find for them a guiding mentor.
their judgment is with my lord, if you had any sense!
o believers! shall i guide you to an exchange that will save you from a painful punishment?
the disbelieving chiefs of his people responded, “we surely see you as a fool, and we certainly think you are a liar.”
this ˹quran˺ is an insight for humanity—a guide and mercy for people of sure faith.
to whoever of you wills to take the straight way.
many among the people of the book wish they could turn you ˹believers˺ back to disbelief because of their envy, after the truth has been made clear to them. pardon and bear with them until allah delivers his decision. surely allah is most capable of everything.
and my brother aaron is more eloquent than i, so send him with me as a helper to support what i say, for i truly fear they may reject me.”
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “how can you worship besides allah those who can neither harm nor benefit you? and allah ˹alone˺ is the all-hearing, all-knowing.”
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any benefit.
˹imagine˺ how many peoples we destroyed before them, who were far mightier than them. then ˹when the torment came,˺ they ˹desperately˺ sought refuge in the land. ˹but˺ was there any escape?
they say ˹to the prophet˺, “if we were to follow ˹true˺ guidance with you, we would certainly be snatched away from our land.” have we not established for them a safe haven ˹in mecca˺ to which fruits of all kinds are brought as a provision from us? but most of them do not know ˹this favour˺.
so do not give in to the deniers.
they ask you ˹o prophet˺ regarding the spoils of war. say, “their distribution is decided by allah and his messenger. so be mindful of allah, settle your affairs, and obey allah and his messenger if you are ˹true˺ believers.”
and olives and palm trees,
we helped them so it was they who prevailed.
say, ˹o prophet,˺ “surely my lord has guided me to the straight path, a perfect way, the faith of abraham, the upright, who was not one of the polytheists.”
˹this is˺ a sûrah which we have revealed and made ˹its rulings˺ obligatory, and revealed in it clear commandments so that you may be mindful.
we will soon attend to you ˹for judgment˺, o two multitudes ˹of jinn and humans˺!
this is what you are promised for the day of reckoning.
if we willed, we could have certainly taken away what we have revealed to you ˹o prophet˺—then you would find none to guarantee its return from us—
and whenever they make a donation, small or large, or cross a valley ˹in allah’s cause˺—it is written to their credit, so that allah may grant them the best reward for what they used to do.
do the disbelievers think they can ˹simply˺ take my servants as lords instead of me? we have surely prepared hell as an accommodation for the disbelievers.
this is how those who used to reject allah’s signs were ˹also˺ deluded.
so it was. and we awarded it ˹all˺ to another people.
only those who come before allah with a pure heart ˹will be saved˺.”
for during the day you are over-occupied ˹with worldly duties˺.
so we inflicted punishment upon them, drowning them in the sea for denying our signs and being heedless of them.
and the reward of the hereafter is far better for those who are faithful and are mindful ˹of allah˺.
but no one believed in moses except a few youths of his people, while fearing that pharaoh and their own chiefs might persecute them. and certainly pharaoh was a tyrant in the land, and he was truly a transgressor.
you will never find a people who ˹truly˺ believe in allah and the last day loyal to those who defy allah and his messenger, even if they were their parents, children, siblings, or extended family. for those ˹believers˺, allah has instilled faith in their hearts and strengthened them with a spirit from him. he will admit them into gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with him. they are the party of allah. indeed, allah’s party is bound to succeed.
as well as ˹olive˺ trees which grow at mount sinai, providing oil and a condiment to eat.
˹allah asked,˺ “why have you come with such haste ahead of your people, o moses?”
the messiah, son of mary, was no more than a messenger. ˹many˺ messengers had ˹come and˺ gone before him. his mother was a woman of truth. they both ate food. see how we make the signs clear to them, yet see how they are deluded ˹from the truth˺!
indeed, we afflicted pharaoh’s people with famine and shortage of crops so they might come back ˹to their senses˺.
what is the striking disaster?
even though the stories ˹of destroyed nations˺ that have already come to them are a sufficient deterrent.
whatever charities you give or vows you make are surely known to allah. and the wrongdoers will have no helpers.
and ˹it is˺ allah ˹who˺ created you from dust, that is certainly easy for allah.
so they came back to their senses, saying ˹to one another˺, “you yourselves are truly the wrongdoers!”
they are descendants of one another. and allah is all-hearing, all-knowing.
