he makes the oxen and the horses look with him. So many are the animals [4], bipeds and quadrupeds;
1 INDRA, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor's ever-conquering wealth,
6 Agree, through these our watery oblations, Goddesses, Heaven and Earth, with Ahibudhnya.
1. ASVINS, what praise may win your grace? Who may be pleasing to you both?
thee'; the mind is the lord of thought; verily by the mind he purifies him. He says, 'Let the lord of speech
15 Two brown-hued steeds, Indrota's gift, two bays from Rksa's son were mine,
The Immortal, O thou Holy One, mid mortal men, the God-devoted God, the wise, have they brought
atmosphere', he says, for the distinction of these worlds. 'May Dyutana Maruta set thee up', he says;
9 May Agni bless us with his fires, and Surya warm us pleasantly:
5. Ye rich in strength, through your great power vouchsafe us blessings day and night!
8 Let there be light through both the worlds for worship: may we be far from most overwhelming evil.
Like God, the soul too is beyond the three guṇas. In bodily consciousness, we identify with the pain and pleasures of the body, and consequently vacillate between the emotions of elation and dejection. But those who are established on the transcendental platform of the self do not identify either with the happiness or the distress of the body. Such self-realized mystics do perceive the dualities of the world but remain unaffected by them. Thus, they become nirguṇa (beyond the influence of the guṇas). This gives them an equal vision, with which they see a piece of stone, a lump of earth, gold, favorable and unfavorable situations, criticisms and glorifications as all the same.
1 WITH worship will I glorify thee, Agni, like a long-tailed steed,
Accordant came with strength to Jahnu's children who offered you thrice every day your portion.
3 When war and battles are on foot, booty is laid before the bold.
has four syllables; 'Utter' has two syllables; 'We that do utter' has five syllables; the Vasat has two
those that are derived from all the gods, the strong (plants) that furnish
8 His covering assumes a radiant hue; where'er he comes into the fight he drives the foe afar.
They by thy mental powers were made immortal, Vaisvanara, when thou shonest from thy Parents.
9 Come to us, Agni, with the gracioug Fathers who dwell in glowing light, the very Kavyas,
d Thou art the restrainer, the ruler on earth; thou art the restrainer who dost restrain; thou art the
As fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, their offspring, as a thread continuously spun out.
The One subdueth the destructive enemy; the Other with a few furthereth many a man.
o Thou art the bird of fair feathers; thy head the Trivrt (Stoma), thy eye the Gayatra, thy breath the
Most manly with these men of his who help him, dealing out wealth and gathering the treasure.
By night as in the day the grey one was born young, passing untouched by eld through many an age of
Give richly, Agni, to the Visvamitras in rest and stir. Oft have we decked thy body.
Give to thy praisers: let not fortune fail us. Loud may we speak, with brave men, in the assembly.
May Vaja aid us in the fight for booty, and helped by Indra may we quell the foeman.
4.6.80 Sukta 80 – An Oblation to the Sun, conceived as one of the two heavenly dogs, as a
offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni with light; (they say), 'Should another be taken out, after lighting
11 Put forth thy strength: with dappled Steeds come, thou of mighty intellect,
4 For, Vasu thou precedest every Morning, and still hast been the Twins' illuminator.
1. BRISK, at the place of Ila, hymned by men who wake, our own familiar Friend is kindled in the
should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the burnt; verily he pacifies him with his own share, and
7 We see her there, the Child of Heaven apparent, the young Maid, flushing in her shining raiment.
13 Let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpouring juice:
redeemed this (victim) from Agni. Therefore though sacrificing it to another god, still one should first
Agni, with the pressing-day have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the sacrificial fees have I obtained; thee,
Lords it o'er Soma with the stone, with Soma bringing forth delight, flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
'The night is Agni's, cattle are Agni's; verily let us praise Agni here; he being praised by us will restore
14 The God whom enemies threaten not, nor those who tyrannize o'er men,
5. The waters, verily, are healers, the waters are scatterers of disease, the waters cure all disease: may they.
The bow of thine, O Rudra, on the south, may the wind blow after it for thee, to thee, O Rudra, with the
which he is this world. Visnu deposited himself in three places, a third on the earth, a third in the
and an eater of food. 'By sacrifice to the god Indra, may I be powerful', he says; verily he becomes
30 The streams of days, were poured as 'twere from heaven: the wise King doth not treat his friend
Yea, or a thousand steeds, and let thy chariot come to us with might.
Soma and Pusan, aid my thought with favour: with you may we o'ercome in all encounters.
4 Ye in the unripe udders of the milch-kine have set the ripe milk, Indra, thou, and Soma.
1. FORTH from the middle of the flood the Waters-their chief the Sea-flow cleansing, never sleeping.
3. They who spat upon the Brâhmana, who desired tribute from him, they sit in the middle of a pool of blood,
he was destitute of proper food, he saw this set of eleven, and therewith he won proper food. In that
As such my wishes have most lately grasped him, invoking Indra both at eve and morning.
the womb. 'For ploughing thee, for good crops', he says. Therefore plants grow up without ploughing.
having offered the Çatarudriya, he should put down on the last brick an oblation of Gavidhuka; verily he
1. MEN come not nigh thy majesty who growest beyond all bound and measure with thy body.
sacrificer is the Pañcadaça; the sacrificer the Ekavimça, the sacrificer the Trayastrinça, and the others
Who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land most powerful, prepared to aid us in the wilds.
14 Make me your friend: show us some little mercy. Assail us not with your terrific fierceness.
Thou art, O Youthful Lord, the Gods' Invoker, so, best of Sacrificers, bring them quickly.
should be elevated between the Ahavaniya fire and the oblation holder [2], between the oblation-holder
For on you both I call that are ready to listen,
10 Agni and Soma, unto him who worships you with holy oil
offers five times. The Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. The
mouth of the chariot for him who desires force; the Rastrabhrts are force, the chariot is force; verily by
On Agni calls Vasistha, even the household priest, the household priest to win his grace.
May he augment in them splendour and vigour: observant, as he lists, he gathers increase.
6 For, through the swift Gods' loving help, in many an autumn, Maruts, we
1. VASISTHA mastered the Rathantara, took it from radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Visnu,
Vatsapri Bhalandana win the home dear to Agni; verily by it he wins the home dear to Agni. It has
4 Him who did Urana to death, Adhvaryus! though showing arms ninety-and-nine in number;
Dear shall he be to Surya, dear to Agni, who with pressed Soma offers gifts to India.
2 I stimulate thy zeal, the Strong, the Hero decking my song of praise forth; Immortal.
Divine and foeless Aditi quickly listens. May these deliver us unharmed from trouble.
11 Thy spirit, that went far away to distant realms beyond our ken,
is a purifier; verily they purify themselves. He who cannot see himself would be dead. Having made it
1. O THUNDERER, zealous worshippers gave thee drink this time yesterday.
If one would glut him with the biesting, Agni, pierce with thy flame his vitals as he meets thee.
4 Showing her wonted form each day that passeth, spreading the light she visiteth each dwelling.
winning it on every side. The heads of animals are bricks, breath supporting, full of sight; in that he puts
Sit to thy Hotar task; pay worship duly, and serve the Gods, Devapi, with oblation.
the first he won expiration, with the second inspiration, himself with the third, (the cups) for the Maruts
Thou, by his side, for young and glorious Kutsa, with steed and car in battle slewest Susna,
becomes not worse. He against whom witchcraft is practised should draw the Ukthya cup first. The
5 We speak by our descent from our primeval Sire; our tongue, when we behold the Soma, stirs itself.
7 The seven milk a single cow; the two set other five to work,
3. Wherever thou hast been bitten, wherever thou hast been sucked, from there do we exorcise for thee the
That thou, O Hero, bold and boldly daring, didst with thy bolt, by strength, destroy the Dragon.
cattle; curds are strength; he mixes with curds in the middle; verily he places strength in the middle of
3. O Agni, with thy lofty beams, with thy pure brilliancy, O God,
7 That lofty Indra-power of thine, thy strength and thine intelligence,
6 The Daughter of the Sky, like some chaste woman, bends, opposite to men, her forehead downward.
15 Indra is Vrtra-slayer, guard, our best defender from the foe.
If two libations are offered simultaneously, then one should perform the early litany in the advanced part
4.10.6 Sukta 6 – Praise of the virtues of an Amulet of Khadira wood in the shape of a
on the kindling-sticks [4]; this is the birthplace of Agni; verily he mounts it on its own birthplace. Now
8 Ye fly like swans, like those who travel on their way; like buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed.
Who, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as, twere a mother cow.
Loose for the sacred grass thy dear companions. These men who bring oblation call thee hither.
h Let me attend on thee, with Tvastr's aid; rich in seed, bearing seed, may I find a hero in thy presence.
(him); separately they bestow life on the sacrificer; what was his that (is his again). From the gold [4] he
Nest-like, bedewed with oil. Bear this our worship to Savitar who sacrifices rightly.
40. It pleases the cattle when she is given to the Brahmans; moreover, the sterile cow is pleased, when she is
1. IN the Tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama drinketh with the Gods,
With manly strength triumphant, foe-subduer,-may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
according to the text. 'Be rich the sacrifice; may I be rich', he says; verily he invokes this blessing.
3 Agni, thou beamest forth with light, great Hero, never changed by time.
More rapidly than Vayu seize the Soma juice, better than Agni give us food, to you I sing.
3 The foolish, faithless, rudely-speaking niggards, without belief or sacrifice or worship,Far far sway hath Agni chased those Dasytis, and, in the cast, hath turned the godless westward.
and the Apsarases. 'To him hail! To them hail!' (with these words) he offers, and thereby he appeases
Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon this Herb.
7 Thou from the stake didst loose e'en Sunahsepa bound for a thousand; for he prayed with fervour.
from the sky, made to fall by Vayu. 'To him, O goddess, be Vasat with thee' [1], he says; the seasons are
So, Indra, with the Maruts be thy friendship: in all these battles thou shalt be the victor.
Savitar, like a God.whose Law is constant, stands in the battle for the spoil like Indra.
Then Yama marked thee, God of wondrous splendour! effulgent from thy tenfold secret dwelling,
sap let them all be; they shall not live a single day!
puts down a gold disk; gold is immortality; verily in immortality he piles the fire, for propagation. He
Pavamana cups are drawn off, but these are not drawn off by him, the wooden vessel, the stirring-vessel,
Unstained by dust the Maruts, mighty in their strength, have cast down e'en firm things, armed with
'May I be fit to drink honey'; (he fills with curds) to be curdled with hot milk, for purity. The curds are
6 Send us delightful things, ye Maruts, on your steeds: come ye, O Mitra, to our gifts.
3 Best giver of delight, he flows to Indra's throat, robing himself in might, Auspicious One, for fame.
Shared by all men, victorious, subduer: vouchsafe to us superior strengith in battles.
10 Long be thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest ample wealth to him
They sing their song aloud that they may drink sweet juice: well do they know the Hero's first heroic
does he again employ it. The second three nights begin with the Jagati, the Agrayana is connected with
Since here incited, for thy friends, O Indra, thou breakest e'en the firm built stall of cattle.
5 Loud roarers, giving strength, devourers of the foe, they make the winds, they make the lightnings
in that he recites muttering, that [2] is (the foundation) of the Upançu and the Antaryama (cups); in that
Looker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord, Indra, of what moveth not!
Knowing, O Vasus, boons that should be granted, even from afar drive back the men who hate us.
5 To whom the Goddess Rodasi clings closely, whom Pusan follows bringing ample bounty.
2 Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrsakapi hath wrought;
35. What, O earth, I dig out of thee, quickly shall that grow again: may I not, O pure one, pierce thy vital spot,
The Çaka, is for earth; the field-rat, the Kaça, the flying fox, these are for the fathers; the pole-cat for the
7 Borne hither by thy Stallions, drink, Indra, this juice which we have pressed,
32 So thou, O Agni rich in light, beaming like Surya with thy rays
Grant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present, give them energy, ye Fathers.
Amongst all the gifts we can give to others, the gift of spiritual knowledge is one of the highest, because it has the capacity to transform the recipient eternally. King Janak had asked his Guru, “The transcendental knowledge you have bestowed upon me is so precious that I feel deeply indebted to you. What can I give you in return?” Guru Ashtavakra replied, “There is nothing you can give that will relinquish you from your debt. The knowledge I gave was divine and all that you possess is material. Worldly objects can never be a price for divine knowledge. But you can do one thing. If ever you find someone who is thirsty for this knowledge, share it with him.” Shree Krishna states here that he considers the sharing of the knowledge of the Bhagavad Gita as the highest loving service one can render to God. However, those who lecture on the Bhagavad Gita should not feel they are doing something very great. The proper attitude of the teacher is to see oneself as an instrument in the hands of God, and to accord all credit to the grace of the Lord.
2 Far be from us, O Maruts, ye free givers, your impetuous shaft;
a Pankti verse, for one who desires food with a Viraj verse. 'Let Agni (kindled) with the kindling-stick
He made the Cow, and be became the Sovran of Heaven, primeval, matchless, and unshaken.
4. The (Apsarâs) who rejoice in dice, who carry grief and wrath-tbat joyful and exulting Apsarâ, do I call hither.
5 Agni gives to the worshipper a son, the best, of mightiest fame,
offices; verily with the Hotr's offices he cooks it. 'May the women thee', he says; the women are the
Maghavan is our Helper, our Protector, giver of spoil and wealth to make us famous.
For him Sarasvat! pours forth water and butter, milk and meath.
5. Agni has said this, and Soma has said this; Brihaspati, Savitar, Indra (have said) this. These divine purohitas,
2 For him, the God who is invoked by many, the two swift Bay Steeds to the pole I harness,
In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the Strong for sons and progeny and riches undisturbed.
Give us of Amrta for the sake of offspring: awake the excellent fair stores of riches.
toes; verily obtaining the greatness of man they cease (the rite). There are Tryahas consisting of Jyotis,
5 In mighty battle we invoke Indra, Indra in lesser fight,
5 To Indra must a laud be said, to strengthen him who freely gives,
7 On all sides, Soma, be to us a Guardian ne'er to be deceived.
a Of thee, O drop, pressed by Brhaspati, and possessing power, I draw
9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning: with lucid rays he forced apart the darkness.
Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from disease.
May the Dawns flushing move me to exertion, and bear me safely over every trouble.
17 When holy grass is strewn and fire enkindled, with hymn and lowly homage I invite you.
you.' He gave it to him, he accepted it, and (saying), 'Thou didst further me', gave it to Visnu. Visnu
3 Lord! Help us attain our objectives. Help us acquire a sharp mind.
May Agni, may Vaisvanara with vigour, present, preserve us day and night from foemen.
With this well ordered sacrifice, well finished, do ye fill full the channels of the rivers.
He drives the flames below as floods their swell: the rays rise up to the fair place of heaven.
for him, he does not guide his friend according to his will.
Bright, glad, in front of songs they spread to form a vesture for the Lord.
6 When thou hast filled it, Fulgent One! thou layest bare the gloom with light.
The oil-anointed Bull, Agni who hears, who sends as God full hero strength to him who freely gives.
with raised tail. To Indra, the good protector, he offers a cake on eleven potsherds and to Indra, who
2 I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying that in due time thy body might be fruitful.
'When thou didst cause to sacrifice the Srñjayas, with many sacrificers, didst thou cause the sacrifice to
Refulgent, be an ever-heedful keeper, Agni, for us and for our seed offspring.
11 In houses first he sprang into existence, at great heaven's base, and in this region's bosom;
words) he pours a libation over the omentum; verily he wins the strength of Agni; (it serves) also for
either side, on the left the black, on the right the white; having offered them he should put down the
Effused, the source of Indra's joy: may your strong juices reach the Gods!
1. Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify in speech,
verily no offering would be made to Vastospati [3]. The right (animal) is yoked, the left not yoked, and
All Sons of Immortality shall hear it, all the possessors of celestial natures.
Varuna., Mitra, from the stronger mortal. Gods, which of you at sacrifice giveth comfort?
5 The villagers have sought their homes, and all that walks and all that flies,
4 Rise up, O Agni, spread thee out before us: burn down our foes, thou who hast sharpened arrows.
3. When war and battles are on foot, booty is offered to the bold.
6 This is the lofty hymn of praise, exalting the Lords of Mighty Stride, the strong and lofty.
confusion. If he should offer that to Varuna along the stream of the waters, Varuna would seize his
7. May (the mourning woman) with suffused eyes hurry on, may she that hath short (mutilated?) ears shout when
Herald of sacrifice be he who knoweth he hath reached Gods, himself, with measured motion.
The Lord controls the world with grandiose forces of creation, maintenance, and annihilation. At present, he is being perceived by Arjun in this mode as the all-devouring force that is engulfing his friends and allies from all sides. Viewing the apparition of future destined events in the cosmic form of God, Arjun sees his enemies being wiped out in the imminent battle. He also sees many of his allies in the grip of death. Petrified by the spectacle he is seeing, Arjun supplicates before Shree Krishna in the next verse.
e Thou art the lady paramount, the great quarter; the Maruts, the deities, are thine overlords [2],
The Rbhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras sung thee as the first.
3. Sable is thy hiding-place, sable thy dwelling-place, sable art thou, O plant: drive away from here the speckled
Favour these, Indra, when they fight with faemen, as Friend and Hero and the heroes' Helper.
I should support the singer, God. who givest wealth! and not abandon him to woe.
Lord of wealth in herds of kine; Lord of the battles with the foe.
(Asat), to save us from decline and to support us in the growth of our mental abilities.
34 Not for one trespass, not for two, O Hero, slay us, nor for three,
15 Agni, the man who giveth guerdon to the priests, like well-sewn armour thou guardest on every side.
5 Even he who cats his firm hard food with swiftness,and overtakes the nights as Vayu kingdoms.
invokes [4], for cattle have four feet. If he desire of a man, 'May he have no cattle', he should take for
3. He, when the people deck him like a docile king of elephants,
5. With this plant I have put to naught all spells, those that they have put into thy field, thy cattle, and into thy
3 Bearing the Gods' own Eye, auspicious Lady, leading her Courser white and fair to look on,
Let other men around us live in folly here let us have a rich and liberal patron.
I be adorned with the Naksatras', said yonder (sky); I May I be adorned with variegated things', said this
4.4.15 Sukta 15 – ?? Charm against Demons (Pisaka) conceived as the cause of Disease
7 O Indra, turn us not away: be the companion of our feast.
19. Spread out far unto great extent, with a thousand surfaces, in the world of the pious! Grandfathers, fathers,
c O Agni, that of thee which is pure, which is bright,
O Âditya, in thy law, exempt from guilt, live in freedom!
2. O Satakratu Indra, now rejoice with that carouse of thine
1. May Vata breathe his balm on us, healthful, delightful to our heart:
He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hath roared within the goblet of the pious.
4. Consume thy own (proper) oblation with gratification in thy mind, when I here offer svâhâ in my mind!
fifteen. As for ten of them, the Viraj is ten-syllabled, the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj they win food.
6. The mother shall sleep, the father shall sleep, the dog shall sleep, the lord of the house shall sleep! All her
Former of bodies, be the singer's Providence: all good things hast thou sown for him, auspicious One!
We dissipate a large portion of our thought power and energy in combating people whom we perceive as enemies and potentially harmful to us. The Vedic scriptures say the biggest enemies—lust, anger, greed, envy, illusion, etc.—reside in our own mind. These internal enemies are even more pernicious than the outer ones. The external demons may injure us for some time, but the demons sitting within our own mind have the ability to make us live in constant wretchedness. We all know people who had everything favorable in the world, but lived miserable lives because their own mind tormented them incessantly through depression, hatred, tension, anxiety, and stress. The Vedic philosophy lays great emphasis on the ramification of thoughts. Illness is not only caused by viruses and bacteria, but also by the negativities we harbor in the mind. If someone accidentally throws a stone at you, it may hurt for a few minutes, but by the next day, you will probably have forgotten about it. However, if someone says something unpleasant, it may continue to agitate your mind for years. This is the immense power of the thoughts. In the Buddhist scripture, the Dhammapada (1.3), the Buddha also expresses this truth vividly: “I have been insulted! I have been hurt! I have been beaten! I have been robbed! Misery does not cease in those who harbor such thoughts. When we nourish hatred in our mind, our negative thoughts do more damage to us than the object of our hatred. It has been very sagaciously stated: “Resentment is like drinking poison and hoping that the other person dies.” The problem is that most people do not even realize that their own uncontrolled mind is causing them so much harm. Hence, Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj advises: mana ko mano shatru usaki sunahu jani kachhu pyare (Sadhan Bhakti Tattva)[v1] “Dear spiritual aspirant, look on your uncontrolled mind as your enemy. Do not come under its sway.” However, the same mind has the potential of becoming our best friend, if we bring it under control of the intellect, through spiritual practice. The more powerful an entity is, the greater is the danger of its misuse, and also the greater is the scope for its utilization. Since the mind is such a powerful machine fitted into our bodies, it can work as a two-edged sword. Thus, those who slide to demoniac levels do so because of their own mind while those who attain sublime heights also do so because of their purified minds. Accordingly, Franklin D. Roosevelt, former President of America, expressed this very nicely: “Men are not prisoners of fate, but only prisoners of their own minds.” In this verse, Shree Krishna enlightens Arjun about the potential harm and benefits our mind can bestow upon us. In the following three verses, Shree Krishna describes the symptoms of one who is yog-aru?ha (advanced in Yog).
3. Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee nigh to favour us,
1. IN ladle dropping oil your food goes in oblation up to heaven,
cause one to sacrifice with the twelve-day (rite), to avert evil.
the full moon; verily he has recourse to Agni with his own share; verily he leads him to the path from
In this verse, the word dharma has been used four times. Dharma is a word commonly used in Hinduism and Buddhism. But it is the most elusive word to translate into the English language. Terms like righteousness, good conduct, duty, noble quality, etc. only describe an aspect of its meaning. Dharma comes from the root word dhṛi, which means ḍhāraṇ karane yogya, or “responsibilities, duties, thoughts, and actions that are appropriate for us.” For example, the dharma of the soul is to love God. It is like the central law of our being.The prefix swa means “the self.” Thus, swa-dharma is our personal dharma, which is the dharma applicable to our context, situation, maturity, and profession in life. This swa-dharma can change as our context in life changes, and as we grow spiritually. By asking Arjun to follow his swa-dharma, Shree Krishna is telling him to follow his profession, and not change it because someone else may be doing something else.It is more enjoyable to be ourselves than to pretend to be someone else. The duties born of our nature can be easily performed with stability of mind. The duties of others may seem attractive from a distance and we may think of switching, but that is a risky thing to do. If they conflict with our nature, they will create disharmony in our senses, mind, and intellect. This will be detrimental for our consciousness and will hinder our progress on the spiritual path. Shree Krishna emphasizes this point dramatically by saying that it is better to die in the faithful performance of one’s duty than to be in the unnatural position of doing another’s duty.
4 For then the net of Law, Dyaus, and the wide expanse, Earth, Worship, and Devotion meet for
Let not malignant Nirrti rule over us. We crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods.
3 Provide, O Soma-Rudra, for our bodies all needful medicines to heal and cure us.
2. Great sap of all forms (colours) it hath-they call thee moreover the seed of the ocean. Where the honey-lash
5 Whatever these thy bands perform to please thee or to win them wealth,
8 He, Agni, whom the twice-five sisters, dwelling together, in the homes of men engendered,
Send us, O Bhaga, triple wealth and treasure; cause the two worlds to prosper us, Preserver!
the rough side. The rough side indeed is not connected with cattle; verily he becomes without cattle. If
(from heaven), and for support. Having prospered in either world they cease (the rite). The (nights) are
1. Hear this my call, O Varuna, and show thy gracious love today:
33. As the seed grows in the field, in the furrow drawn by the ploughshare, thus in me offspring, cattle, and every
where the cow being covered made water, thence grew the Balbaja; verily making him follow the way of
2. Then surely, yea quite surely, of the hundred remedies contained in thee, thou art the most superior in checking
alternating, to prevent burning. A horse, a bull, a ram, a goat, these are the sacrificial fee; for manliness.
5 Like the Angirasa Hiranvastupa, I call thee, Savitar, to this achievement:
May Bhaga the Dispenser come with power and grace, and far-pervading Aditi listen to my call.
Not even in wide stronghold may all the folk stand firm who have provoked to anger his surpassing
2 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are your growths.
A spiritual experience gives a happiness that is far more thrilling and satisfying than all the material joys put together. Sanjay is rejoicing in such happiness and sharing his experience with the blind Dhritarashtra. Reflecting and remembering wonderful dialogue, he is feeling divine bliss. This indicates the sublimity of the knowledge contained in this scripture and the divinity of the leela (pastimes) that Sanjay was a witness to.
2 Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast approached us from the farthest distance.
Upon hearing the science of karm-yog, people often wonder that if they give up attachment to results, will their performance go down? Shree Krishna explains that working without personal motivation does not reduce the quality of our work; instead we become even more skillful than before. Consider the example of a sincere surgeon who cuts people with his knife while operating upon them. He performs his duty with equanimity, and is undisturbed irrespective of whether the patient survives or dies. This is because he is merely doing his duty unselfishly, to the best of his ability, and is not attached to the results. Hence, even if the patient dies while being operated upon, the surgeon does not feel guilty of murder. However, if the same surgeon’s only child needs to be operated, he does not have the courage to do so. Because of attachment to the results, he fears he will not be able to perform the operation skillfully, and so he seeks the help of another surgeon. This shows that attachment to results does not make us more skillful; rather, the attachment affects our performance adversely. Instead, if we work without attachment, we can do so at our maximum skill level, without feeling nervous, jittery, scared, tense, or excited.Likewise, Arjun’s personal example also illustrates the point that giving up attachment to the fruits does not adversely affect performance. Before hearing the Bhagavad Gita, he intended to engage in war with the desire of winning a kingdom. After hearing the Bhagavad Gita from Shree Krishna, he was fighting because it was his duty to God, and Shree Krishna would be pleased by it. He was still a warrior; however, his internal motivation had changed. The fact that he did his duty without attachment did not make him any less competent than before. In fact, he fought with greater inspiration because his work was directly in service of God.
10 With most heroic aid from thee, like heroes Indra, may we win wealth by deeds glory.
1. May Agni Vaisvânara, the bull of unfailing strength, burn up him that is evil-disposed, and desires to harm us,
Was known, yet young as guardian of the seasons; and he quelled Araru, four-footed dernon.
g Thou art the path of the atmosphere; thou art the gods' path of the atmosphere.
1. THE Daksina's broad chariot hath been harnessed: this car the Gods Immortal have ascended.
comes. The Ahavaniya is the abode of the gods, between the fires of cattle, the Garhapatya of men, the
makes him ready. If he were to deposit (the gold) without fastening it on, then the foetuses of offspring
That in thy strength, O Thunderer, thou hast struck down Vrtra from the floods, lauding thine own
21 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, O King, protect us as a Sage with wisdom.
They by thy mental powers were made immortal, Vaisvdnara when thou shonest from thy parents.
8 O Dawn, now give us wealth in kine and heroes, and horses, fraught with manifold enjoyment.
1. May this (younger brother) not slay the oldest one of them, O Agni; protect him that he be not torn out by the
Who marks, as they were backs, all living creatures: ne'er doth he fail a friend, the noble Indra.
the sacrificial fee is a white-backed (ox). To Indra (he offers) on eleven potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a
harm him! Like a provident mother in her lap Mitra shall befriend him, shall save him from misfortune!
8 Ministers, men, whatever thing ye long for obtain ye quickly bringing gifts to Indra.
art a lioness, winning (the favour of) the Adityas; hail!' They found support here. Having found support
4. For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of weal,
The three-fold divisions of dānam, or charity, are now being described. It is an act of duty to give according to one’s capacity. The Bhaviṣhya Purāṇ states: dānamekaṁ kalau yuge [v5] “In the age of Kali, giving in charity is the means for purification.” The Ramayan states this too:pragaṭa chāri pada dharma ke kali mahuñ ek pradhānajena kena bidhi dīnheṅ dāna karai kalyāna [v6]“Dharma has four basic tenets, one amongst which is the most important in the age of Kali—give in charity by whatever means possible.” The act of charity bestows many benefits. It reduces the attachment of the giver toward material objects; it develops the attitude of service; it expands the heart, and fosters the sentiment of compassion for others. Hence, most religious traditions follow the injunction of giving away one-tenth of one’s earnings in charity. The Skandh Purāṇ states:nyāyopārjita vittasya daśhamānśhena dhīmataḥkartavyo viniyogaśhcha īśhvaraprityarthameva cha [v7]“From the wealth you have earned by rightful means, take out one-tenth, and as a matter of duty, give it away in charity. Dedicate your charity for the pleasure of God.” Charity is classified as proper or improper, superior or inferior, according to the factors mentioned by Shree Krishna in this verse. When it is offered freely from the heart to worthy recipients, at the proper time, and at the appropriate place, it is bequeathed to be in the mode of goodness.
5 Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region of the air:
for support. By those metres which were heavenly, the gods went to the world of heaven; for that the
Rend his joints, Jatavedas, let the cater of flesh, flesh-seeking, track his mangled body.
6 For, Agni, like a herdsman, thou by thine own might rulest o'er all that is in heaven and on the earth;
17 O God! May I never bad-mouth the persons who are rich but charitable, who perform virtuous
the autumn in the afternoon; verily he wins whatever brilliances there are. They are offered in sets of
he says; verily he removes the pain from the vital airs. From the vital airs the pain enters the earth; (with
I need to be moved into the light of your wisdom.
c When the Soma is pressed [2] the first drop which falls has potency to destroy the power, strength,
with twelve. They offer a beast to Prajapati-Prajapati is the sacrifice that the sacrifice may not be
9 Let thine heroic strength come from behind us, before us, from above us or below us.
4 Urged by the wind be spreads through dry wood as he lists, armed with his tongues for sickles, with a
The best attitude of charity is to give without even being asked to do so. The second-best attitude is to give happily upon being requested for it. The third-best sentiment of charity is to give begrudgingly, having being asked for a donation, or to regret later, “Why did I give so much? I could have gotten away with a smaller amount.” Shree Krishna classifies this kind of charity in the mode of passion.
1. I have called upon heaven and earth, I have called upon the goddess Sarasvatî, I have called upon Indra and
25. The dolphins, great serpents (boas), purîkayas (water-animals), sea-monsters, fishes, ragasas at which thou
confusion. (The offering) to Vaiçvanara is on twelve potsherds; the year has twelve months; verily by
4 Ye who with mighty powers have stirred the regions up, your coursers have sped forth directed by
with this offering wins thus the highest victory over his foe.
In this our sacrifice may we divide the spoil, showing our strength, the spoil of war.
7 From far away, from heaven, the redhued noted Sage, Steer of the triple height, hath sung unto the
Bringing a blessing to the field, shall bear our precious gift to Gods.
7 My songs are lifted up, and acts most splendid are to be performed.
21 The very trees were joyful at my coming: kine they obtained in plenty, steeds in plenty.
They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one and all, the truth as I declare it.
with the measure of Agni, with the path of the Jagati, With the strength
3 Pour on us, Soma, with thy stream manconquering might which many crave,
purify thee'; verily by speech he purifies him. He says, 'Let the god Savitr purify thee'; verily being
whence Prajapati created them; and the thousand resorts to him. He becomes a prey to the gods who
d Speech, breath, eye, ear, offspring, the organ of generation may I not brush, I brush thee that art strong
8 First the Gods brought the hymnal into being; then they engendered Agni, then oblation.
No one can assert that you are not generous in giving.
25. Counting its dead by thousands, the hostile army, pierced and shattered in the clash of arms, shall lie!
The third corrects the imperfections left by each. Thou who didst these things first art worthy of our
To them, great Parents of the Gods, have sages of ancient time, singing, assigned precedence.
Hast thou struck down like woods with well-shot lightnings: thou rentest them in fight, most manly
donkey, the flier' [6], he says, for the seers called him the 'donkey'. 'Bearing Agni of the dust', he says,
b The theologians say, 'Since clay and water are not food for Agni, then why is he piled with clay and
middle the beast, last the speckled butter; therefore the fore-sacrifices are performed with butter, the
3. Worshipped with fat libation. Lords of gifts, Adityas, sovran Kings,
Who Maker, throned in three worlds, helps the Aryan man, and gives the worshipper his share of Holy
behold the months by the half-months. Having made up the months by the new moon night, they leave
with the self; therefore they do not cut off from it; verily living he goes to the gods.
Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with strength, the food that merits laud.
winking is the name of the wind; to you homage; be ye gentle to us; him whom we hate and who hateth
29 Golden is its supporting shaft, the axle also is of gold,
1. FROM out the earth I dig this plant, a herb of most effectual power,
Like your own fon upon his parents' bosom, protect us, Heaven and earth, from fearful danger.
14 Celestial and terrestrial generations, and Waters will I summon to the feasting.
the rubble of Agni', he says, for the paraphernalia are the rubble of Agni. Or rather they say, 'These
4. Now Morning with her earliest light shines forth, dear daughter of the Sky:
b Ye two are bays; ye are the grains for the bays, mixed with Soma.
To him like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to Agni let the lauds go forth.
And all our enemies, who near or far away prevail against us, crush, and leave them destitute.
2. May the many paths, the roads of the gods, which come together between heaven and earth, c,ladden me with
Verily he will hear and mark this word of ours: we will pour Indra forth as 'twere a spring of wealth.
Indra brought down the fierce destroyer's fury. He gave them various roads, the path's Controller.
24. Those that ride on chariots, and those that have no chariots, those that are mounted, and those that are not
4 Lords of the brave, infallible, foe-destroyers, great Kings, bestowers of fair homes to dwell in,
46 The mortal man who serves the God with banquet, and, bringing gifts at sacrifice, lauds Agni,
8 Ye Visvedevas, swift at work, come hither quickly to the draught,
e The mole is thy beast, O Rudra; rejoice in it.
Uniting with a body be thou welcome, dear to the Gods in their sublimest birthplace.
his own share; verily he for him begets offspring by means of expiration and inspiration; he obtains
Viçvavasu stole it. It was for three nights stolen; therefore after purchase the Soma is kept for three
15 Usas, as thou with light to day hast opened the twin doors of heaven,
father, nor our mother. Cause no injury, O Rudra, to our own persons!
27. From the one and a hundred deaths, from the dangers that are surmountable, from that Agai Vaisvânara (the
32 Vrtra he slays with his right hand, even Indra, great with mighty power,
6 In union they have sung the hymn: with stones they urge the Tawny One.
rivals!--This measure, that is being measured, and has been measured, may constitute thy kin into (people) that
4 For, overthrowing what hath ne'er been shaken, thou goest forth alone destroying Vrtras.
and thus they are ahungered; verily he makes these worlds fitted for them, and as they become fitted he
We come to thee whose providence protects us: wide be thy sway for ever for thy singer.
5 Thine are we, Indra; thine are all these people, conscious of might, whose cars are set in motion.
Therefore from the pruning of trees more (shoots) spring up, for that was what they chose as a boon.
9 Men who lead evil lives, who break agreements, and injure Varuna, Aryaman and Mitra,Against these foes, O Mighty Indra, sharpen, as furious death, thy Bull of fiery colour.
2. The curse of the rival and the curse of the kinswoman, the curse which the Brahman shall utter in wrath, all that
a bull as a beast of burden. (He offers) to Agni on eight potsherds, and curds to Indra; the sacrificial fee
3 Fain to lend vigour to the Bull, the siste.. with reverence recognize the germ within him.
overcoming of foes. (He should cut one) Of seventeen cubits for one who desires offspring; Prajapati is
3 Maghavan, grant us that same car to bring us spoil, thy conquering car in which we joy in shock of
Which, in the Mother Cow's most lofty station, the Bull's tongue, of the flame bent forward, tasted.
thousand million, and ten thousand million, and a hundred thousand million, and ten hundred thousand
14. They that pierce the heart, creep along the ribs, without doing injury, without causing disease, they shall run
7 1ndra is priest and Rsi, he is much invoked by many men,
19 This wealthy Rathaviti dwells among the people rich in kine,
16 Indu hath started for Indra's special place and slights not as a Friend the promise of his Friend.
Hence sendest thou, O sapient Jatavedas, to him who serves thee treasures in succession.
1. THAT mighty eye of Varuna and Mitra, infallible and dear, is moving upward.
Like bonds of cord, Indra, that bind the younglings, no bonds are they, O thou of boundless bounty.
3. Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, O Indra, who would smite us dead: thy liberal bounty gives us
5 Thou, Indra, with the Tempest-Gods, the breakers down of what is firm '
11 Wilt thou not, Agni, lend us aid in winning cattle, winning wealth?
9. Four times, eight times, be reverence to Bhava, ten times be reverence to thee, O lord of cattle! To thy (charge)
Swa-dharma is the prescribed duties based upon our guṇas and station in life. Performing them ensures that we use the potential abilities of our body and mind in a constructive and beneficial manner. This leads to purification and growth, and is auspicious for the self and society. And since the prescribed duties are in accordance with our innate qualities, we feel comfortable and stable in discharging them. Then, as we enhance our competence, the swa-dharma also changes and we step into the next higher class. In this manner, we keep advancing by dutifully executing our responsibilities.
3. Thy mother's name is gîvalâ ('quickening'), thy father's name is gîvanta ('living'). Verily no harm shall suffer this
6 Thine aid we claim, O Indra, thine who after thou hast waxen great
viands', he repeats, a verse which has not any indication (of its deity) and (therefore) is addressed to
15 Wishes for wealth have gone to Indra, longing for him in war for light and at libation,
5 Meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive not, ofone mind, one with another.
1. VASU, thou most youthful God, Bharata, Agni, bring us wealth,
The gods and the Asuras were in conflict; the Asuras sought to force them from the quarters; the gods
4. Slain is the king of the worms, and their viceroy also is slain. Slain is the worm, with him his mother slain, his
2. Rapidly have the ruddy beams of light shot up: the red cows have they harnessed, easy to be yoked.
Yonder sun did not shine; the gods desired an atonement for him; for him they offered a white cow to
Daughter of Paksa, she bestows new vital power, she whom the ancient Jamadagnis gave to me.
2 Here where the arrows fall amid the banners both hosts invoke the Gods in emulation.
4 May the Wind waft to us that pleasant medicine, may Earth our Mother give it, and our Father
By his high wisdom have the mighty Sages wrought: the Fathers who behold mankind laid down the
Menaka and Sahajanya his Apsarases, his missile biting beasts, his weapon the death of men.
3 Those Asvins I invoke who work marvels, brought hither to receive,
I The man of evil heart, O bright ones, O Maruts,
should offer to the All-gods (a beast) of many forms; his relatives are connected with the All-gods;
rather they say, 'It should not be stepped on'; the pan is connected with Nirrti; if he were to step on it, he
2. The pressing-stones are set at work: the meath is poured into the tank
10 Most Mighty, most heroic One, for mighty bounty fill thee full.
To Tvastr hail! To Tvastr the seminal hail! To Tvastr the multiform hail!
3 Refulgent from the bosom of the Mornings, he in Whom singers take delight ascendeth.
5 Who was the father of the child? Who made the chariot roll away?
1. PRAYERS have been offered up through love of glory: Vasistha, honour Indra in the battle.
4 They, even the Maruts who were there, excited with song the meath-created strength of Indra.
Through presentation of our food he grows not old in this his from;
10. Brihaspati, the descendant of Angiras, and the seers, inspired by (our) song, did fix the three-jointed
Firm on the seat of earth is based the altar: eye-like, the sacrifice is directed Sun-ward.
Let these life-fostering waters flow attended by the Marut host, lauding thine own imperial sway.
recourse to the All-gods with their own share; verily they give him food; he becomes an eater of food. It
This is the fair-checked God who, joying in the draught, breaks down the castles in his strength.
2.3.1.5 Mantra 5: The Explanation of the Mantras in 1. 4
2 Our priest is seated, true to time; the grass is regularly strewn;
1. Winner of gold and gear and cattle flow thou on, set as impregner, Indu! 'mid the worlds of life!
be puts down) on the south; the sky is food, the seventeenfold is food; verily on the south he places
Vrtra. The gods having slain Vrtra said to Agni and Soma, 'Bear the offering for us.' They said, 'We two
Thou hast become a Singer most like Angiras: thou madest Surya mount to heaven.
2 Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving combatant,
6 Thou hast made prayer the means of thine exalting, therefore we wait on thee with hymns, O Indra.
15 The station of the Bounteous God hath, through his aid which none impair,
8 I praise thy gracious favour: sing in answer. May this my song sing like a loved one with thee.
2. Spontaneous let our drops of Soma juice flow on, pressed out and tawny-coloured, mightily, to the Gods!
2 What then? As men whose fields are full of barley reap the ripe corn removing it in order,
desires support; the Ekavinça is the support of the Stomas; (verily it serves) for support. It has eight
9 Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, made with singers, with the skilful and the
5. Help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, a lovely hymn in Rudra's praise,
hospitality of Agni. For Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Gayatri. 'Thou art the
27 May the Gods' company make me clean, and Vasus make rue pure by song.
2. Erect, to heaven hath the Gandharva mounted, pointing at us his many-coloured weapons:
13 Invite thou hither with this song, for praise, Agni the Lord of Prayer,
That men might press with stones the gladdening yellow, strengthened with milk, fermenting, to exalt
thereby he frees himself from Varuna's noose [3]. 'I have drawn thee', he says, for he draws him. 'Be
Thine is the task of Cleanser and Presenter: waken us, Wealth-bestower and Producer.
2. May Agni who is Hotar-priest among mankind accept our songs,
6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room, for us and for our children.
2 Surrounding, as it were, self-born, self-powerful, they spring to life the shakers-down of food and light;
theologians say, 'One should offer curds first, for curds is made first' [4]. One should disregard that and
6 I will declare thine exploits wrought aforetime, and, Maghavan, thy deeds of late achievement,
serves) to win Prajapati [2]. Whatever the gods did in the sacrifice, the Asuras did; the gods perceived
15 And may he. duly bring to me the six bound closely, through these drops,
43 I saw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires that rose on high o'er that beneath it.
2. This Brahman, comer at due time, named Indra, is renowned and praised.
worn out, so the fire when established wears out; at the end of the year he pays reverence with
in cattle of the metres, and consecration waits upon a man who is rich in cattle. The Tristubh flew up, of
5 O Chariot-borne, this car of yours invested with rays of light comes harnessed to our dwelling.
24. For thee the wild beasts of the forest have been placed in the forest: flamingoes, eagles, birds of prey, and
2. This (cow) doth injure our cattle: a flesh-eater, devourer, she hath become. Hence to a Brahman he shall give
do, all that he propitiates with them. He offers nine; nine are the breaths in man, the sacrifice is
The goods of Anu's son he gave to Trtsu. May we in sacrifice conquer scorned Puru.
Thou art called Father, caring even for the weak, and wisest, to the simple one thou teachest lore.
share; he gave them at the full moon this offering for Agni and Soma on eleven potsherds. They said,
anew shalt sit (at our sacrifice)! Delight, O Agni, thy own body, and, sacrificing, bring good fortune here to us!
the thousandth would follow the thousand; now the thousand has no understanding, and would not
There are two Sadahas, they make up twelve days. Man is of twelve parts, two thighs, two arms, the
7 Varuna, King, of hallowed might, sustaineth erect the Tree's stem in the baseless region.
Led by the men, with invocations of the Gods, through the fleece, thou hast given us strength to win the
approach for all a woman; they shall not clean his raiment with cleansing stuff; for all these things the
c Thou art overcoming; may I be overcoming among my equals, overcoming, a guardian, a granter of
Driving off Raksasas and Yatudhanas, the God is present, praised in hymns at evening.
shall move! Man and wife, alive, with living children, shall remove thee from the hearth of the fire!
6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned; to one of these may come the troubled
Come hither, ye Nasatyas, with accordant mind, to meet and to enjoy my gifts.
Brought it for life and not for death, yea, brought it for security.
as many as might be the case, 'Let us perform (the rite) for these months, the eleventh and the twelfth,
Which from their arms speeds with the car to Vrtra's slayer for the kine.
15 Even as the Maruts, onslaughts who attack the foe, those born the first of all knew the full power of
May this Brhaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and horses, men, and heroes.
Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.
4 Now sing ye forth the God-given hymn to your exultant Marut host,
So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and the fleet courser's might that speeds to ample wealth.
f Three seeds are there, father, son, grandson [4]; if he were to put down two Retahsic (bricks), he would
2 Brave, seeking war and booty, dwelling with the good and with the swift, may he hasten the food of
she ate it, she became pregnant; of her the four Adityas were born. A second (mess) she cooked; she
is possessed of sight through Agni and Soma; verily by means of them he confers sight upon himself.
3. O Indra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipito us:
Wishing to do thee service, Agni, they are there, desirous of thy friendship grant them store of wealth.
e Give of the water, cleave the holder of the water; from the sky, from Parjanya, from the atmosphere,
20 Show forth the mind that brings success in war with fiends, wherewith thou conquerest in fight.
gods what is given, but keeps his cattle with himself. 'May (my act) as I give be not destroyed', he says;
22 Pour forth the gift which Kanvas bring, for none more glorious do we know
were in conflict, they deposited their desirable wealth; the gods appropriated it by means of the
Thereon, Adityas, send us down your blessing: grant us a shelter hard to be demolished.
1. Even as the wild bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert's watery pool,
year; offspring are born in the course of the year; (verily it serves) for the propagation of offspring. The
8 At this dawn's flushing, God! our ancient fathers served thee with offerings, making thee their envoy,
puts them in order. 'Be united, he says; therefore the kingly power unites with the holy power; in that
15 Varuna makes the holy prayer. To him who finds the path we pray.
As Bhaga, Lord of men! thou rulest over wealth, and guardest in his house him who hath served thee
28. Agni kindled, spreads his flames, fortified by ghee, sprinkled with ghee. Victorious, all-conquering Agni shall
6 Cleaver of stalls, kine-winner, armed with thunder, who quells an army and with might destroys it.Follow him, brothers! quit yourselves like heroes, and like this Indra show your zeal and courage.
40 Grown strong in heaven, the Thunder-armed hath bellowed, Vrtra-slayer, Bull,
1. THY streams that never fail or waste flow forth like showers of rain from heaven,
For him, O mighty Rbhus, ye, rejoicing, have fashioned wealth with plenteous store of heroes.
May the lovely goddess that bore Indra come to us, endowed with lustre!
fire, by that verily is hospitality offered to Agni. Or rather they say, 'Agni is all the gods.' In that he
17 So sapient Indra, Lord of Might, brought Turvaga and Yadu, those
Traversing many wide unmeasured spaces, over the wastes ye pass, and fields, and waters.
15 To him the Mighty One, the self-resplendent, verily strong and great, this praise is uttered.
With singers' hymns have we brought the Fort-render near, singing to Indra for his grace.
sacrifice, and falls not away from the sacrifice. 'Do thou proclaim' has four syllables; 'Be it proclaimed'
to mate. Thou art a bull, thy enemies are eunuchs; thou ownest Indra's foesubduing fire!
2 Child of Thyself the sacrifice is for the righteous blent with meath,
The filtering juices hasten to their eulogy, the drops that gladden find their way to Indra's heart.
Their high imperial might may nowhere be assailed, ne'er may their Godhead be assailed.
knowing the two milkings of the sacrifice milks thus the sacrifice on both sides [2], in front and behind;
3. May he be our beloved King and excellent sweet-toned Hotar may
2 In thee, effused, O Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great supremacy in fight.
Thou, Indra, knowing, thinking, Lord of Tawny Steeds, above all glories waxest great.
balance. The Prsthas are force and strength; verily they place force and strength in the middle. They
26 May Indra give thee skill, and lights of heaven, wealth to his votary
6. Thou art one of the golden substances, thou art born from Soma (the moon). Thou art sightly on the chariot,
he hates and he who hates him; verily straightway he cuts their necks. 'To sky thee, to atmosphere thee,
upon him. In the clotted milk [2] he puts down the cake; verily he makes him possessed of a body, and
When through the forest, urged by wind, he spreads, verily Agni shears the hair of earth.
3. Do thou, most youthful God, protect the men who offer, hear their songs,
Since at thy birth all Deities adorned thee for the great fight, O thou invoked of many.
11 Worthy of praise and worth the winning, Heroes, is that your favouring succour O Nasatyas,
9 Thou from the curse didst free the mighty Waters, and as their only God didst watch and guard them.
The heavens, the growing plants, the living waters, the forest trees preserve their wealth for Indra.
May they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
47 Ten thousand head of kine, and steeds three times a hundred they bestowed
In him unite all paths that lead to riches, like rivers that commingle with the ocean.
2 She before all the living world hath wakened, the Lofty One who wins and gathers treasure.
Blessed is thy most favouring benevolence, so, verily, do we desire thy saving help.
the Naksatra, the serpent of the deep the deity; Revati the Naksatra, Pusan the deity; the two Açvayujs
At Hariyupiya he smote the vanguard of the Vrcivans, and the rear fled frighted.
In Indra are all creatures closely held; in him meet the distilling Soma-drops.
Where was one chariot wheel of yours? Where stood ye for die Sire's command?
3 Yea, the strong man to whom ye have vouchsafed to give a sage, shall move
kindling-wood serve Agni', (with these words) he puts a kindling-stick, made wet with ghee, upon him
Attempting to quench the cravings of the senses by supplying them with their desired objects is like trying to dowse a fire by pouring clarified butter on it. The fire may be smothered for a moment, but then it flares up with redoubled intensity. Hence, the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam states that desires never go away when they are fulfilled; they only come back more strongly:na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām upabhogena śhāmyatihaviṣhā kṛiṣhṇa-vartmeva bhūya evābhivardhate (9.19.14) [v49]“Fulfilling the desires of the senses does not extinguish them, just as offering oblations of butter in the fire does not extinguish it; instead, it makes the fire blaze even stronger.”These desires can be compared to an itch in the body. The itch is troublesome and creates an irresistible urge to scratch. But scratching does not solve the problem. For a few moments, there is relief, and then the itch returns with greater force. Instead, if someone can tolerate the itch for some time, it begins losing its sting, and dies down slowly. That is the secret for getting peace from the itch. The same logic applies to desires as well. The mind and senses throw up myriad desires for happiness, but as long as we are in the game of fulfilling them, happiness remains illusory, like the mirage. But when we learn to discard all these desires, to find happiness in God, the mind and senses make peace with us.So an enlightened sage intelligently masters the senses and the mind. The illustration used in this verse is that of the turtle. Whenever it encounters danger, the turtle protects itself by drawing its limbs and head inside its shell. After the danger passes, the turtle again extracts its limbs and head and continues on its way. The enlightened soul possesses similar control over the mind and senses and can retract and extract them according to the needs of the situation.
an oblation to earth [3] who desires, 'May I gain gold; may gold resort to me.' In that it is (offered) to
6 These, Mitra, Varuna whom none deceiveth, with great power quicken even the fool to wisdom,
9 Now may that weaithy Cow of thine, O Indra, give in return a boon to him who lauds thee.
22. Firm are the bones of thy skull, and the beat of thy heart. At thy rising, O sun, thou didst remove the pains of
4.11.5 Sukta 5 – Glorification of the Sun, or the Primeval Principle, as a Brahman Disciple
he casts it on both; verily he makes him rich in cattle in both worlds.
Those who have come most near to thine invoking calls, strengthen them fearful to behold.
The question may be raised that if soul is distinct from the guṇas and their activities, then why are the ignorant attached to sense objects? Shree Krishna explains in this verse that they become bewildered by the guṇas of the material energy, and think themselves to be the doers. Infatuated by the three modes of material nature, they work for the express purpose of being able to enjoy sensual and mental delights. They are unable to perform actions as a matter of duty, without desiring rewards.However, the kṛitsna-vit (persons with knowledge) should not disturb the minds of the akṛitsna-vit (persons without knowledge). This means that the wise should not force their thoughts onto ignorant persons by saying, “You are the soul, not the body, and hence karm is meaningless; give it up.” Rather, they should instruct the ignorant to perform their respective karm, and slowly help them rise above attachment. In this way, after presenting the distinctions between those who are spiritually wise and those who are ignorant, Shree Krishna gives the sober caution not to unsettle the minds of the ignorant.
4 Indra, come hither: evermore thou camest through our great strong desire to drink the Soma.
4. O ye plans of theirs, fly ye away; O ye schemes, be ye confused! Moreover, what now is in their mind, do thou
15 Come to us ye who pour down wealth, come to the home which men must guard:
day [1], on which the horse is slain, there are twelve months, five seasons; these worlds are three; the
'May I be possessed of food, an eater of food'; by Agni he wins food, by Soma the eating of food; verily
possessed of power. It is ruddy and has eyebrows; that is the form of Indra; (verily it serves) for
4 When, suppliant for your help, Lovers of Sweetness! I seeking wealth call you to our libation,
sacrificer. The theologians say, 'What is it that the sacrificer does in the sacrifice whereby he goes alive
5 We invocate that Indra who bestoweth precious things on us.
These swift outpourings in long course of holy rites: no form save only Indra shows itself so pure.
3 Him in his constant seat men skilled in worship have taken and with praises have established.
8. Go away to the Mahâvrishas and the Mûgavants, thy kinsfolk, and consume them! Those (regions) do we
establishes on the east the beginning of the sacrifice. 'Thou art the portion of the Yavas', (with these
Or when the worshipper augments his riches let not his treasures be shut up
The region of the radiant Moon, where food and full delight are found. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake:
Thoul O Brhaspati, with Indra for ally didst hurl down water-floods which gloom had compa-sed round.
Such, Lord of Treasure, give us splendid riches. I praise the Friend's gift, his whose wealth is mighty.
12. The Sâdhyas (blessed) go holding up with might one support of the net, the Rudras another, the Vasus
two potsherds to the Açvins, and on one potsherd to sky and earth. The Açvins are the physicians of the
2 O Devas! Shower your benevolence upon us. May you be generous to us ever, approving of the
Lay in the wood the Soviran of the Forest, and sink the well although ye do not dig it.
he piles the fire in the second year, he saves the atmosphere by it; in that he sacrifices in the third year,
3. That, Satakratu, thou, to serve and please thy praisers, as it were,
5 With thee, O Indra, are most bounteous riches that further every one who lives uprightly.
a 'He who performs the sacrifice not according to the deities falls a victim to the deities, he becomes
1. YOUR radiant Chariot-whither goes it on its way?-who decks it for you, Heroes, for its happy course,
And may the Waters, bright like castles, hear us, as they flow onward from the cloven mountain.
a Ye are active, thou art the lord of the waters, thou art the male wave, thou art the male host, ye are the
2. With brilliantg purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest up thyself in light.
3 Thy sharpened flames, O Agni, like the gleams of light that glitter through,
to the world of heaven, and overcame the Asuras by what was unsuccessful.' What is successful in the
pressing-stones, the cups for Vayu, the wooden trough; they lead forth the wife (of the sacrificer), they
9 The Spring that fails not with a hundred streamlets, Father inspired of' prayers that men should utter,
(he should give) as a mess in boiled (milk) to Visnu Çipivista. Agni thus generates offspring for him;
1 Homage to him of the cistern, and to him of the well.
Indra and Vayu is drawn on the tenth day; verily having reached the end of the sacrifice [5], they
sacrifice, pure, and divine. He purifies (him) with two (stalks); verily he purifies him by days and nights.
Aditya was the animal; with it they sacrificed; it won this world where Aditya is; this is thy world, thou
i Homage [1] to the ruddy one, the ruler, to the lord of woods homage!
Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army's wings what time thou comest in the van of these swift
had recourse to Prajapati; for him he offered this oblation of panic seeds to Soma and Indra; verily
14 The pitchers, Indu, with thy streams have sung aloud in vigorous might
3 Even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert's watery pool,
27 Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great munificence:
and steeds,Lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss. With brave men in the assembly may we speak
3. This (lead) overcomes the vishkandha, this smites the devouring demons (atrin); with this I have overwhelmed
son born to him, verily is born to him a brilliant and resplendent son. 'This prayer I utter, bringing light
4 Agni Vaisvanara, both Earth and Heaven submit them to thy threefold jurisdiction.
8. If I, O Indra, were, like thee, the single ruler over wealth
milked it, has fresh milk its name (pratidhuk). 'They have collected it; they have milked it; but it rests
7. The ants devour thee, pea-hens hack thee to pieces. Yea, every one of you shall declare the poison of the
him. He should repeat all the metres for one who makes many sacrifices, for all the metres are won by
Movers of men, mild both, are Mitra, Varuna, mover of men is Aryaman.
cooked to the gods. Therefore one should cook it, without burning it, for the gods. He covers it with
5 Mover of speech, we robe him with our songs as he is purified
He formed the nectar in three headlong rivers. Soma supports the wide mid-air above us.
3 That Brahmanaspati, most High and Gracious, I glorify with offerings and with homage.
22 O Indra, Lover of the song, when shall thy praiser be most blest?
11 Thou whom Gopavana made glad with song, O Agni Angiras,
sacrifice of him who removes the fire is split; he pays reverence with a verse containing the word
Whom Apnavana, and the Bhrgus caused to shine bright-coloured in the wood, spreading from home to
potsherds; Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; verily he delights the year; verily also he brings up the year for
3 How dost thou decorate our hymn, O Agni? What power dost thou exert when thou art lauded?
25 Chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, Soma flowcth on,
Dire is his death who pours no gifts great light hath he who offers them. Good are the gifts that Indra
5 Purify Soma when effused with stones which bands move rapidly,
which fell entered the earth; Brhaspati [1] seized it, (saying), 'Be this (mine) for enjoyment'; it became a
that have strength; satiate them, and then shall ye overcome the Asuras.' They said, 'Name (them).' He
Viçvavayasa found these cups, and to them these worlds, the distant and the near, became revealed; to
Heroes, your course is through the forest trees of earth, and through the fissures of the rocks.
The drop of Soma breaketh all the strongholds down, and Indra is the Rishis' friend.
1. GRACIOUSLY-MINDED he is flowing on his way to win dear names o'er which the Youthful One
4 He, for God's sake, chose death to be his portion. He chose not, for men's good, a life eternal
performed the Raksases are fain to destroy the sacrifice; now then is this (place) the beginning of the
15. Like a poisoned arrow, O king, like -an adder, O lord of cattle, is the terrible arrow of the Brâhmana: with that
That it be well with friends and those who praise thee, and, Savitar, with the loud-lauding singer.
4. This varana will ward off (vârayishyate) the spell that has been spread against thee; this will protect thee from
d 'Homage to Rudra, slayer of Makha; for this homage guard me' (with these words he reverences) the
1. Bring (wealth) to us, do not stand in our way, O Arâti; do not keep from us the sacrificial reward as it is being
i To the ocean thee, to water thee, to the watery thee, to impulse thee, to the wise thee, to the radiant
24 O Indra, Vrtra-slayer, let Soma be ready for thy maw,
3 We have drunk Soma and become immortal; we have attained the light, the Gods discovered.
Him who hath waxen great, invoked with beauteous songs, Immortal One, whose praise each day is
22 What time the loving spirit's word had formed him Chief of all food, by statute of the Highest,
offspring be for our enjoyment'; then was born the Aditya Vivasvant, men are his offspring here, among
of the sacrifice. 'All that is dear to it is invoked', he says; verily not vainly does he invoke.
remnant, therefore it is drawn from the remnant. He draws with three verses; mother, father, son, verily
1. O INDRA, drink this Soma, pressed out in the mortar, full of sweets.
Decking thee like a horse, the swift prizewinner. May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
Prajapati (bricks); in that he takes up the kindling-sticks, and the trees are Visnu's, verily he puts down
11 Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the blest favour of the Maruts, Rudra's Sons.
41. From the sterile cows which the gods, returning from the sacrifice, created, Nârada picked out as (most)
7 O Maruts, Lords of all, when Agni and when ye drive downward from sublimest heaven along the
Having stated in the last verse that God descends in the world, he now states the three reasons for doing so: 1) To annihilate the wicked. 2) To protect the pious. 3) To establish dharma. However, if we closely study these three points, none of the three reasons seem very convincing:To protect the righteous. God is seated in the hearts of his devotees, and always protects them from within. There is no need to take an Avatar for this purpose.To annihilate the wicked. God is all-powerful, and can kill the wicked merely by wishing it. Why should he have to take an Avatar to accomplish this?To establish dharma.  Dharma is eternally described in the Vedas. God can reestablish it through a Saint; he does not need to descend himself, in his personal form, to accomplish this.How then do we make sense of the reasons that have been stated in this verse? Let’s delve a little deeper to grasp the import of what Shree Krishna is stating.The biggest dharma that the soul can engage in is devotion to God. That is what God strengthens by taking an Avatār. When God descends in the world, he reveals his divine forms, names, virtues, pastimes, abodes, and associates. This provides the souls with an easy basis for devotion. Since the mind needs a form to focus upon and to connect with, the formless aspect of God is very difficult to worship. On the other hand, devotion to the personal form of God is easy for people to comprehend, simple to perform, and sweet to engage in.Thus, since the descension of Lord Krishna 5,000 years ago, billions of souls have made his divine leelas (pastimes) as the basis of their devotion, and purified their minds with ease and joy. Similarly, the Ramayan has provided the souls with a popular basis for devotion for innumerable centuries. When the TV show, Ramayan, first began airing on Indian national television on Sunday mornings, all the streets of India would become empty. The pastimes of Lord Ram held such fascination for the people that they would be glued to their television sets to see the leelas on the screen. This reveals how Lord Ram’s descension provided the basis for devotion to billions of souls in history. The Ramayan says:rām eka tāpasa tiya tārī, nāma koṭi khala kumati sudhārī [v7]“In his descension period, Lord Ram helped only one Ahalya (Sage Gautam’s wife, whom Lord Ram released from the body of stone). However, since then, by chanting the divine name “Ram,” billions of fallen souls have elevated themselves.” So a deeper understanding of this verse is:To establish dharma: God descends to establish the dharma of devotion by providing souls with his names, forms, pastimes, virtues, abodes, and associates, with the help of which they may engage in bhakti and purify their minds.To kill the wicked: Along with God, to help facilitate his divine pastimes, some liberated Saints descend and pretend to be miscreants. For example, Ravan and Kumbhakarna were Jaya and Vijaya who descended from the divine abode of God. They pretended to be demons and opposed and fought with Ram. They could not have been killed by anyone else, since they were divine personalities. So, God slayed such demons as a part of his leelas. And having killed them, he sent them to his divine abode, since that was where they came from in the first place.To protect the righteous: Many souls had become sufficiently elevated in their sādhanā (spiritual practice) to qualify to meet God face-to-face. When Shree Krishna descended in the world, these eligible souls got their first opportunity to participate in God’s divine pastimes. For example, some gopīs (cowherd women of Vrindavan, where Shree Krishna manifested his pastimes) were liberated souls who had descended from the divine abode to assist in Shree Krishna’s leelas. Other gopīs were materially bound souls who got their first chance to meet and serve God, and participate in his leelas. So when Shree Krishna descended in the world, such qualified souls got the opportunity to perfect their devotion by directly participating in the pastimes of God.This is the deeper meaning of the verse. However, it is not wrong if someone wishes to cognize the verse more literally or metaphorically.
7 On the wind's flight come, glorified, ye two celestial Priests of man
1. So, Lord of affluent gifts, this juice hath been expressed for thee with strength:
longevity, freedom from foes, fearlessness, ease of going, lying, fair dawning, and fair day (prosper
23 Thou, wakeful Hero, by thy might hast taken food of Soma juice,
9 Thou boundest up the Dasa's hundred friends and ten, when, at one's hearing, thou belpest thy
offering on ten potsherds; verily he causes Varuna to seize his foe and lays him low with the Brahman. It
Him who is Lord of horses, Lord of kine,of floods, to Indra, to the Holy bring sweet Soma juice.
5. The Cow, the streaming mother of the liberal Maruts, pours her milk,
They perform the Prsthas in the latter part of the month. Therefore it is on the top that the plants bear
4 Thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. Listen, O Child of Pajri, for to thee I speak.
From radiant Dhitar, Savitar, and Visnu, from Surya did these sages bring the Gharma.
9 Fed with our fuel, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
O kindled God, we mortals are invoking thee, calling on thee to show us grace.
The joyous Maiden is beheld, the butter flows. With richly laden team come to our solemn rite, yea,
When Trta in the height of heaven, like as a smelter fanneth thee, e'en as a smelter sharpeneth thee.
commentary on scriptures, but no single website has thus far undertaken the immense task of posting
n May the Vasus fashion thee with the Gayatri metre, in the manner of Angiras. Thou art the earth; may
of cooked food, (and serves) for prosperity. Milk (is the drink) of the Brahman, the Brahman is
to Savitr he rises up; verily, instigated by Savitr, he sends aloft the wrath of Varuna that is in him; with
They never violate the laws of Indra. Present the oil-rich offering to the Rivers.
he be rich in cattle,' he should separate the sand, after piling the gravel; verily he pours forth for him the
6 O Pavamana, Indu, priests hurry thee on to Indra, thee
8 As to a friendly warrior when he battles, each thing that comes anear is seen to meet him.
11 The King who scattered one-and-twenty people of both Vaikarna tribes through lust of gloryAs the skilled priest clips grass within the chamber, so hath the Hero Indra, wrought their downfall.
Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids wherewith ye, Heroes, made the barren cow give milk.
To Aditi are (to be offered) three ruddy-spotted; to Indrani three black-spotted; to Kuhu three redspotted; three calves to Raka; three heifers to Sinivali; the red-spotted hornless ones are for Agni and
9 Ever avert your blazing shaft from us, and let not your displeasure reach us here
2. Indra, at sacrifice, increased his manly strength, in the wild rapture of this juice:
k To Agni, lord of the house, hail! To Soma, lord of the forest, hail! To Indra's strength hail! To the
Born otherwise, and spotless, ye have entered kinship's bonds with us.
To folk who pay you offierings at appointed times, Chiefs, Lords of splendour, ye bring food to
6 When to your car-poles ye have yoked your spotted deer to be your steeds, and put your golden
it cooked; it is full of butter, for purity; four descended from Rsis partake of it; verily he offers in the
2. The balâsa of him that is afflicted with balâsa do I remove, as one gelds a lusty animal. Its connection do I cut
2. The kinsman, Agni! of mankind, their well-beiaved friend art thou,
a Thou, O Soma, art the giver of wide protection from hostility, brought about by ourselves or by others;
cattle; he should pay reverence with (face) somewhat to the side, then (the fire) does not burn him, he is
Universe created? No one knows, not even the most learned amongst us. All we know is that the day
2 The singers praise him with their song, and learned priests adorn the Steed,
Down rolled, as if on chariots borne, the rivers: through fear of thee all things created tremble.
The seasons, desirous of offspring, could not procure offspring. They desired, 'May we create offspring,
Born in his sons anew he spreads as Law commands, and prospers every way unharmed.
bowstring, the third an arrow; with the first he fits the arrow, with the second he lets it go, with the third
Money is the means for enjoying the world. That is why materialistic people who are driven by insatiable desires accord such priority to accumulating it in their lives. They do not even hesitate to adopt unlawful means for earning wealth. Therefore, double punishment awaits them for their unethical conduct. The Bhāgavatam states: yāvad bhriyeta jaṭharaṁ tāvat svatvaṁ hi dehinām adhikaṁ yo ’bhimanyeta sa steno daṇḍam arhati (7.14.8)[v4] “One is entitled to keep only as much wealth as is necessary for one’s maintenance (the rest must be given away in charity). If one accumulates more than one’s need, one is a thief in the eyes of God, and will be punished for it.” What is the punishment? Firstly, at the time of death, the wealth one earned will not go along—it will be snatched away. Secondly, according to the law of karma, one will be punished for the sins committed in earning the wealth. Just as, if a smuggler is caught, not only are his goods confiscated, but he is also punished for breaking the law.
make a pair; he sacrifices to Agni, lord of the house, for support. There is sameness in the sacrifice [3] in
What time thou holpest Kutsa's son, when Dasyus fell, yea, holpest Kutsa's darling when the Dasyus
May he, O wealthy princes, and this Soma which I am bearing in my heart, reward you.
4.7.38 Sukta 38 – Charm to secure the love of a Man
11 Bards joined in song to Indra so that he might drink the Soma juice,
3 Seeing thee faithful to the Law, most sapient, like the starry heaven,
To thee comes sacrifice which thou acceptest: thou, skilled in holy rites, art he who giveth.
Pleased with the Soma-bringer's skill he maketh him his mate and friend.
Thou with might, Indra, smotest dead the scorner, the footless Vrtra as he waxed in vigour.
Doubts arise from ignorance, and the power to dispel doubts comes from knowledge. Scholars of the scriptures possess theoretical knowledge, which is not good enough to dispel doubts, because the scriptures contain many apparent contradictions that can be reconciled only by realization. The God-realized Saints do possess realized knowledge that is limited in extent. They do not become all-knowing. Such realized Saints do possess the power to dispel doubts, but they cannot compete with God, who is all-knowing. God alone is sarvajña (omniscient) and sarva-śhaktimān (all-powerful), and hence he is supremely competent in removing all ignorance, just as the sun is competent in repealing the darkness.
7 Like women, let this Soma-draught, invested with its robe, approach,
2. Unclose, our manly hero! thou for ever bounteous, yonder cloud
May Agni, he who wakes among Immortal Gods, grant us heroic strength and wealth in noble steeds.
power of Rudra [1], and he would be liable to die. Or rather they say, 'All the gods are the fire, the beast
15 O tawny Bull, thus showing forth thy nature, as neither to be wroth, O God, nor slay us.
ear by name', he says; verily he wins life. 'Thou art the form, colour by name', he says; verily he wins
Lords of the brave, who strengthen Law, the Holy Ones with every race.
4 For we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee, O Indra, who hast numerous kin.
3 The Sage of men, the Lord of human races, pure, purifying Agni, balmed with butter,
Bright, checkless, as it were upon the Atvins' path, lie passeth by the stones and burneth up the grass.
7 Agni, with thee, soliciting thy favour, the holy Ones have gained glory in heaven.
2. Ye to whom belongs all that is near by, yea, all that is far; ye who are known as the most skilful archers among
Even strong birds descend not to the mortal who strives to reach them with swift blow and weapons.
There, seeking man's prosperity, thou torest away the head of Namuci the Dasa.
The whole bad dream, whate'cr it be, to Trita Aptya we consign.
6 The skilful God who knows all forms of knowledge made for himself a fair form, meet for worship.
becomes rich in cattle. 'For what good is the fire piled?' they say. 'May the seven men live upon me',
c He is mighty with those who have arrows in their hands and quivers,
Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter: let the God Indu settle in the beaker!
1. Rise up, O steed, that art within the waters, enter this kingdom, rich in liberal gifts! Rohita (the red sun) who has
My guardians be the firmly-seated mountains: the Fathers, when I call on Gods, defend me!
'For the greatest in strength', he says; for they divided up the greatest part of themselves. 'Thou art
sacrifice is fivefold; verily they win the sacrifice. There can be no Sattra where there is no Chandoma; in
deities are all the metres and all the gods and the Vasat call. If he were to offer them all at once, they
Slain Ahi, and set free the Seven Rivers. O Heaven and Earth, with all the Gods protect us.
1. O Indra marvellously bright, come, these libations long for thee,
He sent our enemies to sleep and slew them, and turned away the foolish and unfriendly.
h O tree, grow with a hundred shoots; may we grow with a thousand shoots.
7 Come to us, Lords of ample wealth, by paths of everlasting Law,
5 Tree, part asunder like the side of her who bringeth forth a child.
purchases the Soma, and they guard the Soma for him in yonder world.
the prime cause of the elements; the One who upholds the Earth and the Sky; the One who is the Lord
Manu prosper; therefore offspring are said to be Manu's. Dhatr established it; therefore Dhatr prospered;
'May Parjanya not rain', he should put it on upwards; verily he holds up rain. What is dug in belongs to
1. To Vadhryasva when. be worshipped her with gifts she gave fierce Divodasa, canceller of debts.
Indra shall drink the Soma, there shall be secure possession; Agni shall sing praises: the enemies do thou drive
open, the open one not close! Reverence (be) to the divine folk!
In this verse, Shree Krishna emphasizes bhakti as the means for attaining him. Earlier, in verse 11.48, he had stated that his universal form can be seen only by devotion. Now, in this verse, Shree Krishna emphatically declares that his two-armed form as he is standing before Arjun can only be realized through bhakti. This has been repeatedly stated in the Vedic scriptures:bhaktirevainaṁ nayati bhaktirevainaṁ paśhyati bhaktirevainaṁ darśhayati bhakti vaśhaḥ puruṣho bhaktireva garīyasī (Māṭhar Śhruti)[v27]“Devotion alone will unite us with God; devotion alone will help us see him; devotion alone will help us attain him; God is enslaved by true devotion, which is the best of all paths.”na sādhayati māṁ yogo na sānkhyaṁ dharma uddhavana svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo yathā bhaktir mamorjitā (Bhāgavatam 11.14.20)[v28]“Uddhav, I come under the control of my devotees and am won over by them. But those who do not engage in devotion can never attain me by practicing aṣhṭāṅg yog, studying Sānkhya and other philosophies, performing pious acts and austerities, or cultivating renunciation.”bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ śhraddhayātmā priyaḥ satām (Bhāgavatam 11.14.21)[v29]“I am only attained through bhakti. Those who engage in my bhakti with faith are very dear to me.”milahiṅ na raghupati binu anurāgā, kieñjoga tapa gyāna birāgā. (Ramayan)[v30]“Without devotion, one can never attain God, no matter how much one endeavors through the practice of aṣhṭāṅg yog, austerities, knowledge, and detachment.” In the next verse, Shree Krishna describes what bhakti is.
Rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the worshippers of heaven, the best of Cheerers.
I drive afar the scorpion hateful to the sight: let not the winding worm touch me and wound my foot.
makes the sacrifice united with the womb, the gift with the womb, Indra with the womb, for union with
Who speeds the good, the breaker-down, the firm, the vast,-Indra whose rites bring joy hath made the
of all. The twelve-day (rite) is speech. If they were to perform the twelve-day (rite) before (what has
The best of sweet meath which the priests have offered: that Indra to his joy may drink, the Hero, that
3. Bend lowly down, as 'twere, your beads: be stands amid the water-flood,
e With the brilliance that is thine, O Agni, may I become brilliant; with the radiance that is thine, O
4 To whomsoever they, Most Wise, have given a home and means of life,
6 Now lying far away, Child of two Mothers, he wanders unrestrained, the single youngling.
for the mighty I seize thee; for the mightiest in strength I seize thee.
6 O Agni, shining of thyself by night and when the morning breaks,
2 Or when on that decisive day thou holpest the presser of the juice at Vrtra's slaughter;
9 Ruler, whose bright far-seeing rays, pervading all three earths, have filled the three superior realms of
9 No one attains to him, as though a man would grasp the heights of heaven.
surrounds the year on both sides. To the kingly class falls the blessing of the part of the sacrifice which
Come thence, O Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand ornaments.
He, Excellently Wise, is come to strengthening food, to spoil and wealth like Etasa.
May we see Turvasa and Yadu! thy great deed, O hero, must be glorified.
full moon (sacrifices) should first offer these two (offerings); verily straightway he commences the new
Forgive whatever sin we have committed may Aryaman and Aditi remove it.
Therefrom were spells and charms produced; the Yajus had its birth from it.
7 Wide, vast, and manifold, whose bounds are distant,-these, reverent, I address at this our worship,
17 Naught else, O Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer's eulogy:
Breaking in pieces like Heaven armed with lightning: Maghavan shall enrich the man who lauds h;m.
3. With that well-aimed arrow of Kâma which parches the spleen, whose plume flies forward, which burns up, do I
sticks of firewood he reveres them upon them all beings have been founded.
3 Darkness prevailed everywhere before the creation of the universe. Yet there subsisted one glorious
Or as all-conquering might in war, be that the Asvins' noblest grace.
bestows upon the sacrificer the glory of the sacrifice. If he desire, 'May I bestow upon the Sadasyas the
'victorious' is the holy power (Brahman); verily they go winning the world of heaven by the holy power
Mark thou the man who injures us and kill him like the heavenly bolt.
1. Bring, Visvakarman strengthened by oblation, thyself, thy body-'tis thine own-for worship
To thee the weary coward prays for luck that he may speed away.
Wins him life's wealthy fulness, blest with heroes: he shall be present, too, where Gods drink Soma.
fain to injure the sacrifice; the path of Agni and Surya is one which the Raksases cannot injure. 'I have
18. Rice and barley shall be auspicious to thee, causing no balâsa, inflicting no injury! They two drive away
verily in the plants he makes cattle find support. 'Thou art the victorious, with ready stone; for Indra
5 Wandering here the radiant Calf finds none to fetter him, and seeks
son born) of one who cleans her teeth has dirty teeth; (the son born) of one who cuts her nails has bad
and the plants; verily also he brings down rain from the waters and the plants. 'Gladdening, obedient',
Bring riches hither unto us, and heroes, and all felicity and joy, Immortals!
The thousand is divided into three parts at the three-night festival; verily he makes her possessed of a
Shree Krishna declares that no amount of self-effort—the study of the Vedic texts, performance of ritualistic ceremonies, undertaking of severe austerities, abstinence from food, or generous acts of charity—is sufficient to bestow a vision of the cosmic form of God. This is only possible by his divine grace. This has been repeatedly stated in the Vedas as well: tasya no hrāsva tasya no dhehi (Yajur Veda)[v24] “Without being anointed in the nectar of the grace of the Supreme Lord, nobody can see him.” The logic behind this is very straightforward. Our physical eyes are made from matter, and hence all that we can see is also material. The Supreme Lord is non-material—he is divine. To have a vision of his divine form we need divine eyes. When God bestows his grace upon the soul, he adds his divine power to our material eyes, and only then can we see him. One may ask that how was Sanjay also able to see that cosmic form, which Arjun saw by divine grace. The Mahabharat states that Sanjay also received by the grace of his Guru, Ved Vyas, who was an Avatār of God. Before the war, the Ved Vyas offered his student Sanjay divine vision so that he may be able to communicate the details of the war to Dhritarashtra. Hence, he saw the same cosmic form that Arjun saw. But later, when Duryodhan died, Sanjay was overwhelmed with grief and lost his divine vision.
The Angirases performed a sacrificial session. They went to the world of heaven. Of them Havismant
To me thou seernest Varuna , O Courser, there where they say is thy sublimest birth-place.
rest of the hymn is not very apparent. In stanza 6 'toiling with strong endeavour' is a paraphrase and
Garhapatya; the sacrificer has two feet; (verily it serves) for support. He offers in the Agnidh's altar;
whatever the wet-banded slavegirl does pollute-may ye, O waters, purify (that) mortar and pestle!
4 Lauded by us, let flow the spring, O Indra, of excellent and brightly-shining riches.
6 Lord of the Bays, come with thy two Bay Horses, come to our prayers, to drink the juice of Soma.
Thou slayer of the evil fiend, saviour of singer such as I.
of the metres, support the pressings?' 'The Agrayana is the calf of the Gayatri; verily turning back
7 1 am the man who sang of old full many a laud when Soma flowed.
11 Well-armed, impetuous in their haste, they deck themselves, their forms, with oblations: to you, the
them; the vultures that feed upon raw flesh shall hack into (their) carcasses!
The rogue shall sit, his belly hanging loose, like a cask without hoops, bursting all about!
Come, let usworship Gods who must be worshipped, and pouring oil, laud those who should be lauded.
6 He, Soma, like a courser in the floods invincible, made clean
4. Wherever, O Agni Gâtavedas, thou perceivest the brood of these hidden devourers (atrin), do thou, mightily
Indra is Lord of prosperers and sages Indra must be invoked in rest and effort.
of force, two camels; to Indra and Agni, givers of might, two sheep that drag the plough; two heifers are
48 Kakuha hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffaloes yoked in fours,
3 Then in his juice whose strength is great, have all the Gods rejoiced themselves,
by means of the brahma (spiritual exaltation) conquered all the worlds, Time, the highest God, forsooth, hastens
3 The Sun receive thine eye, tne Wind thy spirit; go, as thy merit is, to earth or heaven.
12 The man with whom thou fillcst thee with Soma deems himself a pious worshipper.
Prajapati, in which the Soma offering is bitter, to win food; verily also by it he is propagated [5]. There
Thou, visiting both thy mothers, aidest them as son; thou joinest close the earth and heaven.
25 Look each one hither, look around Indra and Soma, watch ye well.
10 Wherewith ye helped, in battle of a thousand spoils, Vispala seeking booty, powerless to move.
2. Win thou the light, win heavenly light, and, Soma, all felicities;
2 The Seven Rivers bear his glory far and wide, and heaven and sky and earth display his comely form.
puts down) on the west; the twenty-onefold is support; (verily it serves) for support. 'The shining, the
2 His two red horses, all-supporting, let him yoke: let him, well-worshipped, urge them fast.
yoking. 'O Agni [1], yoke thy (steeds)', 'Yoke them that best invoke the gods', he says;' this is the yoking
7 Past all pursuers lead us, make pleasant our path and fair to tread:
Even he who praise the high imperial Rulers, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, sing in concert.
Agni we ever seek for seed and progeny, the Vasu who protects our lives.
1. Yea, she most dear amid dear streams-seven-sistered, loved with foundest love.
Bring us in noble shape abundant riches. May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
Help us to wealth exceeding good and glorious, abundant, rich in children and their progeny.
1. KANVAS, tell forth with song the deeds of Indra, the Impetuous,
2. May my arms remain strong; May my thighs remain powerful; May my legs remain strong; May my feet remain
The total number of hymns (1320) allotted for in this draft Atharva Veda are as follows:
1. INDRA hath waxed yet more for hero prowess, alone, Eternal, he bestoweth treasures.
nearest Vahantis; if he were to pass over the nearest Vahantis, he would despise the sacrifice. He should
Soma, effused, is purified and blended our hymns and Trstup songs unite in Soma.
destroy the sacrifice; 'Vat', he says; verily, mysteriously he utters the Vasat cry; his Vasat cry is not
3 On all sides may that Agni guard our household folk and property;
12. All the worlds the gods did conquer through this oblation, (and) by the bolt which Brihaspati, the descendant of
7 Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laudworthy, speeding through the region and the flood,
Here, Lord Shree Krishna states about His dominion and His Supreme position in this universe. He is the Substratum over which this entire creation exists;He is the Creator, Sustainer, and Annihilator. Similar to the beads strung in a thread, which can move in their place, God has given individual souls the free will to act as they wish, yet their existence is bound to Him. The Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad states:na tatsamaśhchābhyadhikaśhcha dṛiśhyateparāsya śhaktirvividhaiva śhrūyate(6.8)“There is nothing equal to God, nor is there anything superior to Him.”In this verse, Lord Shree Krishna has clearly stated that He, in His original form, who stood before Arjunis the Ultimate Supreme Truth. By using the words, Me, My and I, He has dispelled the doubts that many have about Lord Shree Krishna Himself being God, the Supreme Lord. As many suppose that there is another higher formless entity, who is the ultimate source of even Lord Shree Krishna. As the first-born Brahma prays to Lord Shree Krishna:īśhwaraḥ paramaḥ kṛiṣhṇaḥ sachchidānanda vigrahaḥanādirādir govindaḥ sarva kāraṇa kāraṇam(Brahma Samhitā 5.1)“Shree Krishna is the Supreme Lord, who is eternal, omniscient, and infinite bliss. He is without beginning and end, the origin of all, and the cause of all causes.”
is not cut off from the Pavamanas. 'Thou art the hawk, with the Gayatri for thy metre; I grasp thee; bring
12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well this juice is shed for thy delight
these before; they have therefore won all the quarters. He for whom these are drawn attains supremacy,
3 The riteless, godless man who sleeps, O Indra, his unbroken steep,May he by following his own devices die. Hide from him wealth that nourishes.
oppressed, then is one time to stop, for that is a suitable opportunity.
offers; the year has twelve months; verily by the year he wins food for him. 'May for me food, for me
Whom Matarisvan stablished, dweller in the heaven, meet for high praise and holy, sage and true to
Father of Agni, Surya's generator, the father who begat Indra and Vishnu.
We will invoke benevolent Earth and Heaven. Give us, ye Gods, riches with noble heroes.
7 Having restored the Brahman's wife, and freed them, with Gods' aid, from sin,
Now power and the gods depart from the man who is consecrated when he is asleep. 'All the gods have
Thou madest Kutsa, Atithigva, Ayu, subject unto this King, the young, the mighty.
Without a Saman there is no sacrifice. 'O Agni, come hither for the feast', he says; this is the character of
I knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband for mine own.
over up to the mouth [2]; verily on the mouth he bestows food-eating upon him. 'With the lordship of
those whose oldest and youngest die continuously, for the human sacrifice is dearest to him, lie should
7 Soma, bring down the foeman's might, his vigorous strength and vital powe'r,
8. May the closed (serpent's jaw) not snap open, may the open one not close! The two serpents in this field, man
3 Indra and Vayu, drawn by teams, ye Heroes, come today and drink.
verily the sacrificer delights the gods who eat and those who do not eat the offerings; they delight the
I As 'twere Some goodly treasure Matarisvan brought, as a gift, the glorious Priest to Bhrgu,
The Mother carries on her breast the Infant of noble form and soothes it while it knows not.
5. A cruel (sacrilegious) deed is her slaughter, her meat, when eaten, is sapless; when her milk is drunk, that
Great is their germ, that born of them is mighty, great the Bays' Lord's approach through sacrifices.
Who standing in the firmament hath meted the earth out with the Sun as with a measure.
Who, skilled in eloquence, her voice uplifteth, who standeth near at hand with all devotions.
The red, the dark red, the jujube red, these are for Prajapati; the brown, the reddish-brown, the parrot
6 This goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he who drives a car the way to travel.
2 May Aditi welcome, even as a mother her dear heart-gladdening son, my song that lauds her.
18. As the gods drove forth the Asuras, as Indra. forced the demons into the nethermost darkness, thus do thou,
[4], one would cause Etadu to attain the blessing of the sacrifice. 'This (idám) has been glorious, sky and
10. Come, Indra, very near to us with aids of firmly-based resolve
He frolics and draws near, completes his work with song, and bathes in streams to satisfy the
the prosperity of the re-establishing [3] prospers. He who knows his connexions becomes possessed of
With manly might he conquereth those who hate him. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
encompass it, mind can overcome it. Then they repeat the Brahman. The Rc verses are limited, the
golden (drops), that are poured into (the porridge), have, (themselves) pure, established complete purity.
9 Come, O Nasatyas, on your car decked with a sunbright canopy,
Ye Twain are givers both of food and riches: to win me strength and vigour I invoke you.
6 O Sovran of the Forest, as the wind blows soft in front of thee,
be secure among my equals, dread, a guardian, a gainer of wealth.
Straight ye gave Vispali a leg of iron that she might move what time the conflict opened.
Who, fair-faced, favours him who presses Soma with stones made ready, He, O men, is Indra.
Come with thy bay steeds, Thunder-wielder, to our home, to drink them till they make thee glad!
8 Grind off our sins: with song will we conquer the men who sing no hymns:
Like day and night of various hue, like the sky art thou;
This, Indra, must be told of thee who wilt perform heroic deeds.
(amrita). Moreover, thou art food for the living, and thou art, too, a remedy aorainst jaundice.
through the gods, the sin committed by mortals, through mortals; guard us, O god, from wide hostility.
this (earth) they praise, whatever they have praised, through that is this (earth) the serpent queen. Now
9 Fair-gleaming, on Parusni they have clothed themselves in robes of wool,
The streams of oil in swelling fluctuation like a red courser bursting through the fences.
May we have power to hold thy steeds of riches, laying on thee the God-sent gift of glory.
3. Effused by means of pressing- stones, upon the oxhide visible,
9 Now may that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra, give in return a boon to him who lauds thee,
cattle should perform (the rite of) these nights; verily are they propagated with offspring and cattle. This
61. Thou art the scatterer of men, the broadly expanding Aditi that yields milk according to wish. What is wanting
1. WITH offering for success in fight whence Indra was victorious.
And bearing with them his supremest glory the Youthful Ones, gold-coloured, move around him.
7 The heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to one half of me
(oblations)! Do thou (the oblation) grant us sovereignty sped on by Indra; may we in thy favour be glorious!
sky, I take acceptable to Indra; this is thy birthplace; to Indra thee!
He by whose dear help heroes gain their wishes will yield the precious meed as to a victor.
Hurled down by thee the car-borne Lord of Tawny Steeds, the congregated swift ones fled in sundry
10 These glorious things are yours, ye Bounteous Givers; prayer, praise in both worlds are your
Guard of our seed art thou, aiding our cows to bear, incessantly protecting in thy holy way.
serves) for support. If he desire of a man, 'May I deprive him of brilliance, of the deities, of power', he
body, O Agni; guard my body', he says [4], for he is a guardian of the body. 'O Agni, whatever is
8. Loud neighs the tawny steed when started, settling deep in the wooden vessel while they cleanse
6 Pusan was born to move on distant pathways, on the road far from earth and far from heaven.
1. Sing forth to Indu, O ye men, to him who now is purified,
utterance of prayer and homage', he says; 'we have won this', he says in effect. 'It resteth on sky and
food is kept; verily he wins food with its birth place [4]. He deposits Muñja grass; Muñja is strength;
resound; do not, O wooden tool, when raised, do injury; do not mutilate the grain devoted to the gods!
Shree Krishna stated in the previous verse that on becoming situated in transcendental knowledge one develops devotion. Now he says that only through devotion can one come to know God’s personality. Previously, the jñānī had realized God as the nirguṇa (quality-less), nirviśheṣha (attribute-less), nirākār (formless) Brahman. But the jñānī had no realization of the personal form of God. The secret of that personal form cannot be known through karm, jñāna, aṣhṭāṅg yog, etc. It is love that opens the door to the impossible and makes way for the inaccessible. Shree Krishna states here that the mystery of God’s form, virtues, pastimes, abode, and associates can only be comprehended through unalloyed devotion. The devotees understand God because they possess the eyes of love.The Padma Purāṇ mentions a beautiful incident illustrating the above truth. A ṛiṣhi by the name of Jabali saw a very effulgent and peaceful maiden meditating in the forest. He requested her to reveal her identity and purpose of meditation. She replied:brahmavidyāhamatulā yogiṁdrairyā cha mṛigyatesāhaṁ hari padāmbhoja kāmyayā suchiraṁ tapaḥcharāmyasmin vane ghore dhyāyantī puruṣhottamambrahmānandena pūrṇāhaṁ tenānandena tṛiptadhīḥtathāpi śhūnyamātmānaṁ manye kṛiṣhṇaratiṁ vinā [v29]“I am Brahma Vidyā (the science of knowing the self, which ultimately leads to the Brahman realization of God). Great yogis and mystics perform austerities to know me. However, I am myself performing severe austerities to develop love at the lotus feet of the personal form of God. I am replete and satiated with the bliss of Brahman. Yet, without loving attachment to Lord Krishna, I feel empty and void.” Thus, mere knowledge is insufficient for relishing the bliss of the personal form of God. It is through bhakti that one enters into this secret and achieves full God-consciousness.
9 Bestow on us the most illustrious strength ward off men's manifold malignities.
So, Frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all the year, the first of Rain-time.
8 May the Wealth-giver grant to us riches that shall be far renowned.
that he offers an animal to Agni and Soma, it slays hostile things for him; therefore he should eat of it.
curdled itself, and in butter which has churned itself, in a dish of Açvattha wood [2] with four corners
Slay thou our foemen, drive away assailants and make us safe on every side from danger.
Here on our grass let Night and Dawn be seated: bring longing Varuna and Mitra hither.
5 For, Indra, I have heard thee called Self. capturer, One, Steer! who never yields, who urges even the
5 Quick, Indra, give us room and way to riches, and let us bring thy mind to grant us treasures,
Hereby could one be born though waxen mighty. Let him not, otherwise, destroy his Mother.
heat into fire, Rohita created all that has breath through rain (serving) as ghee.
are brought. 'That in truth is penance', they say, 'if a man gives his wealth.' The Gayatri flew up, of four
2 When speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters, religious-hearted votaries brought you forward.
'Charioteer of the rites', he says, for he is the chariot of the gods. 'The Hotr unsurpassed', he says, for no
8. Bhava shall steer clear from us on all sides, Bhava shall steer clear from us, as fire from water! May he not
For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, paths leading as it were directly God-ward.
With these, with Soma and with Pusan, India generates ripe warm milk in the raw milch-cows.
c To the gods the servants of the gods have come, the priests, the eager
b Thou art taken with a support; to Indra and Agni thee! This is thy birthplace; to Indra and Agni thee!
3 Thou, newly-born, for strength didst drink the Soma; the Mother told thee of thy future greatness.
see, (by the eye) of the sacrifice the gods (see) verily he has recourse to Agni and Visnu with their own
May Indra lend his aid to us. Deal forth -abundant is thy wealth-that in thy bounty 1 may share.
butter to men [4], fresh butter is connected with all the gods; verily in anointing with fresh butter he
10 Bearing three Mothers and three Fathers, single he stood erect: they never make him weary.
6 At sacrifices they adore thee, Agni, when the rite proceeds.
Like a swift bird, a cow who yields her milk, pure and refulgent to the wood he speeds.
3. Send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us when thou art cleansed, what earth containeth,
2 Heaven trembled at the birth of thine effulgence; Earth trembled at the fear of thy displeasure.
they drew this cup for the Açvins; then indeed did they replace the head of the sacrifice; in that (the cup)
rain, conquest, victory, wealth, riches, prosperity, prospering, plenteousness [1], lordship, much, more,
3 Thou who art Lord of precious boons, inciter even of the churl.
ten bulls; verily thereby they restored his brilliance. For him who desires splendour he should offer this
Savitar hath stretched out his arms to cherish life, producing with his rays and lulling all that moves.
21 Invincible in fight, saver in battles, guard of our camp, winner of light and water,
anoints with fragments of gold, (it is) for the completion of the sacrifice; verily also he makes healing
4 Knowing his form, the sages yearned to meet him: they have come nigh to hear the wild Bull's bellow.
1 I glorify Agni, the divine Priest and the messenger of my
7 O Rudra, harm not either great or small of us, harm not the growing boy, harm not the full-grown man.
1. FORTH from the bosom of the mountains, eager as two swift mares with loosened rein contending,
5. Give us our portion in the Sun through thine own mental power and aids;
On hearing that sacrifice should be performed in knowledge, the natural question that follows is, how can we obtain spiritual knowledge? Shree Krishna gives the answer in this verse. He says: 1) Approach a spiritual master. 2) Inquire from him submissively. 3) Render service to him.The Absolute Truth cannot be understood merely by our own contemplation. The Bhāgavatam states:anādyavidyā yuktasya puruṣhasyātma vedanamsvato na sambhavād anyas tattva-jño jñāna-do bhavet(11.22.10)[v29]“The intellect of the soul is clouded by ignorance from endless lifetimes. Covered with nescience, the intellect cannot overcome its ignorance simply by its own effort. One needs to receive knowledge from a God-realized Saint who knows the Absolute Truth.”The Vedic scriptures advise us repeatedly on the importance of the Guru on the spiritual path.āchāryavān puruṣho vedaḥ(Chhāndogya Upaniṣhad 6.14.2)[v30]“Only through a Guru can you understand the Vedas.” The Pañchadaśhī states:tatpādāmburu hadvandva sevā nirmala chetasāmsukhabodhāya tattvasya viveko ’yaṁ vidhīyate(1.2)[v31]“Serve the Guru with a pure mind, giving up doubts. He will then bring you great happiness by bestowing knowledge of the scriptures and discrimination.” Jagadguru Shankaracharya stated: yāvat gururna kartavyo tāvanmuktirna labhyate[v32] “Until you surrender to a Guru you cannot be liberated from the material energy.”One of the most magnanimous graces of God is when he brings the soul in contact with a true Guru. But the process of transfer of spiritual knowledge from the teacher to the student is very different from that of material knowledge. Secular education does not require deep respect for the teacher. The transmission of knowledge can be purchased simply by paying the teacher’s fees. However, spiritual edification is not imparted to the student by a mechanical teaching process, nor is it purchased for a price. It is revealed in the heart of the disciple by the Guru’s grace, when the disciple develops humility, and the Guru is pleased with the service attitude of the disciple. That is why Prahlad Maharaj said:naiṣhāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ spṛiśhatyanarthāpagamo yadarthaḥmahīyasāṁ pāda rajo ’bhiṣhekaṁ niṣhkiñchanānāṁ na vṛiṇīta yāvat(Bhāgavatam 7.5.32)[v33]“Until we bathe ourselves in the dust of the lotus feet of a Saint, we can never have an experience of the transcendental platform.” Hence, in this verse Shree Krishna mentions the need for approaching a Guru with reverence, inquiring about the Truth from him with humility, and pleasing him by rendering service.
two receptacles of the brâhmanam (Brahmanic life). These the Brahmakârin protects by his tapas (creative
5. Taught by seven mothers at his birth was he, for glory of the wise.
Thou showest, Indra, -then the bolt thy constant friend, the Bull that ever waits on thee.
For when our latest thought is raised and on Vivasvan centred well,
We come to thee: grant us a happy portion. Let us adore thy might with this oblation.
2.3.5.11 Mantra 11: The Mantras of the Hotr in the Animal Sacrifice
He makes the valiant rich in store of heroes, accepts our praise and hears the singer's calling.
distinction, supremacy over the gods. Therefore after keeping the fire for twelve months, should one pile
Who will loose these for thee without a battle? Yea, and sharp-pointed are our warlike weapons.
Puronuvakya is the Gayatri, the Yajya the Tristubh; verily he makes the ruling class dependent on the
verily with the seasons he cooks it. 'May they cook', he says twice; therefore twice in the year does the
3 And let men say, Agni is born, e'en he who slayeth Vrtra, he
3 Existence, in the earliest age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang.
5 As with oblations of the priestly Manus thou worshippedst the Gods, a Sage with sages,
To the Saman he made obeisance, to the Rc he made obeisance; as the Saman with the Rc (made
Be, for our weal, our Friend and sharer of the feast, and let thy wisdom guard us well.
6 O Agni, loved by many, thou of fame most wondrous, in their homes
9 May we be thine, God Varuna, and with our princes, Mitra, thine.
By giving vent to insatiable lustful desires, the demoniac-minded develop terribly impure etheric hearts. They become full of hypocrisy and pretend to be what they are not. Their deluded intellect embraces wrong ideas and their pride makes them believe that nobody is more intelligent than them. Attracted to the fleeting pleasures of sense objects, their intellect becomes mean, selfish, and arrogant. Thus, they disregard the injunctions of the scriptures and go contrary to what is proper and truthful.
'Earth in depth, sky in breadth,' he says; with this benediction he establishes it. The serpents thought that
21. The earthly and the heavenly animals, the wild and the domestic, the wingless and the winged (animals), have
4 Agni uplifts him at your sacrifices: forth goes the oblation dropping oil and glowing.
Those who unharmed by enemies behold us, while: they would make them bare, stood closely
7 For Indra and for Vayu pressed are Soma juices blent with curd,
2 I am my rivals' slayer, like Indra unwounded and unhurt,
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
and when we have made up the year, let us cease' [1]. In their case their horns grew in the twelfth month.
7 Thou, thunder-armed, with thy great might hast shattered Pipru's strong forts who knew the wiles of
that are in these worlds. He strokes in silence for the fourth time, verily he wins that which is not
1. THE Child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan of sacrifice,
himself and lives all his days. He, having called off the gods from. Vrtra offered at the full moon the
14 He brings the bearer of the laud and Saman: first shall he speak bringing the stone for pressing.
The principles of dharma cannot be determined by mental speculation. Even intelligent persons become confused in the maze of apparently contradictory arguments presented by the scriptures and the sages. For example, the Vedas recommend non-violence. Accordingly in the Mahabharat, Arjun wishes to follow the same course of action and shun violence but Shree Krishna says that his duty here is to engage in violence. If duty varies with circumstance, then to ascertain one’s duty in any particular situation is a complex matter. Yamraj, the celestial god of Death, stated: dharmaṁ tu sākṣhād bhagavat praṇītaṁ na vai vidur ṛiṣhayo nāpi devāḥ (Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam 6.3.19)[v17] “What is proper action and what is improper action? This is difficult to determine even for the great ṛiṣhis and the celestial gods. Dharma has been created by God himself, and he alone is its true knower.”  Lord Krishna says to Arjun that he shall now reveal to him the esoteric science of action and inaction through which he may free himself from material bondage.
17 The Daughter of the Sun your car ascended, first reaching as it were the goal with coursers.
5 With the loud-shouting band who sang his praises, with thunder, he destroyed obstructive Vala.
misfortune', he should say; if it were to go there, the Adhvaryu would be blind, he would be ruined;
rain; he puts them down without touching; verily he produces the world of rain, Parjanya is likely to
Lot not the friend of such as thou come to harm.
The earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and Maghavan, madest bright thy Brother's
5 O Agni, at the third libation takewith joy the offered cake of sacrifice, thou, Son of Strength.
sacrifices which come together in competition. Whose sacrifice then do the gods approach and whose
He brings the Vasus strengthening gifts, and grants deliglht, in rest and stir, for every calling on the
enemy-dispelling (oblation) is to be offered subsequently at the full moon, the sacrificer by it drives
strength, cattle are strength; verily by strength he wins for him strength and cattle. One should not
4 I with a lofty song call hither Vayu, all-bounteous, filler of his car, most wealthy.
The bow of thine, O Rudra, on the north, may the wind blow after it for thee [3], to thee, O Rudra, with
Save us from him who fain would injure us or slay, Most Youthful, thou with lofty light.
As thou, O Indra Thunder-armed, wilt, as the Strong One, slay the foe,
drunkard, pass away! Let him, the impious one, search out some other person, not ourselves! Reverence be to
fears death he should offer to Prajapati this (offering) of a hundred Krsnalas: verily he has recourse to
2. O Lord of ample wealth, these songs of praise have called aloud to thee,
4 Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the Goddesses:
14 Here seated, man-like as a priest shall wisest Agni to the Gods
He who desires a village should offer on eleven potsherds to Indra, on seven potsherds to the Maruts;
6 He verily, the God, the glorious Indra, hath raised him up for man, best Wonder-Worker.
As to the first he rose, the vigorous from of old, so now he runs among the younger lowest ones.
so, the Agnidh would consume the Soma before it had been appeased; he says the secondary Vasat
to me as one, not as a thousand'; verily he who knows thus accepts her as one, not as a thousand. 'Thou
he finds support. (The offering) is in ghee; ghee is life, gold is immortality; verily he unites him with life
12 O Agni, drive afar our foes, our troubles chase malady away and wicked demons.
weariness. It is without horns, for it has Prajapati as its deity; (verily it serves) for prosperity.
verily he takes it up with its brilliance [2]. These worlds are afraid of the falling forward of the tree.
3 He, mighty like a raving river's billowy flood, as a bull conquers oxen, overcomes with strength.
May he whose wrath is fierce, the mighty bearer, come as the house-lord's priest within our chambers.
f Terrify me not, O king, pierce not my heart with thy radiance, for manly strength, for life, for
3. The cows whose divinity is Rohini, they who, moreover, axe (themselves) red (róhinin)-(in their) every form and
2 Like a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath stepped forth from the great enclosure:
3. Vayu and Indra, mighty twain, borne on one chariot, Lords of strength,
Brahmans, the gods did assign to thee as thy share of water.
8. May we obtain thee, Indra's drink, who viewest men and findest light,
Drink thou thy fill, according to thy longing, first, of the goodly mixture blent with Soma.
13 The while the Maruts pass along, they talk together on the way:
4 The cows had settled in their stalls, the beasts of prey had sought their lairs,
He moves with Steeds yoked by eternal Order, contenting men with nave that finds the sunlight.
25 Drive thou away our enemies, O Maghavan: make riches easy to be won.
the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj they win food. As for the (remaining) two, they are days and nights,
11 Brhaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and from below, from sinners!
4 These Pavamanas have obtained all blessings much to be desired,
On Aryaman who gives unasked, the gracious, on Gods who save, on Savitar and Bhaga.
May you as Brhaspati bless us; May you as Adityas bless us;
Thou soyran Lady of all earthly treasure, flush on us here, auspicious Dawn, this morning.
May he, born newly, conquer his assailants: round him they stand as round an angry lion.
11. The excellent, the gladdener, the Sage with heart that understands.
12 Let the strong presser press for thee. Bring hither, thou straight-rushing Bull.
16. The holy (âtharvana) plants, the magic (ângirasa) plants, the divine plants, and those produced by men,
12, Fathers, that Indu which our hearts have drunken, Immortal in himself, hath entered mortals.
What were the hymn, the chant, the recitation, when to the God all Deities paid worship?
is the strength of the metres [2]; he who knows thus sings what ever he sings with the metres in full
21 Wonderful Vayu, Lord of Right, thou who art Tvastar's son-in-law,
5 Soma, as Pavamana thou, our faithful Friend, making for us these real treasures, flowest on.
4 He, beautified by pious men, and coming from their hands adorned,
2. The pepper-corns spake to one another, as they came out, after having been created: 'He whom we shall find
eleven potsherds to Agni and Visnu [2]; all the gods are Agni, the sacrifice is Visnu; verily he has
yagur-formulas; upon whom the serving-priests (ritvig) are employed so that Indra shall drink the soma;-39. Upon whom the seers of yore, that created the beings, brought forth with their songs the cows, they the seven
c Here is support, hail! Here is keeping apart, hail! Here is joy, hail! Here is delight, hail!
13 Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid.
1. Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast approached us from the farthest distance.
21 Now, Indra! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell high like rivers for the singer.
His treasures, his resources, never waste away, whom. whether he be prince or Rsi, ye direct.
2 When, seeking your enjoyment onward from afar, ye, certain of my kinsmen, wandered on your way,
Bearing the well-pressed Soma juice to Indra, they harmonize in spirit with Adhvaryus.
1 ALL sacred songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea,
In your wide lap, auspicious, willing Ladies may the Gods seat them with a willing spirit.
she that delivers (to destruction) the blasphemous Dasyus, she that takes the side of Indra, not of Vritra, (that
earth. Upon the two most lovely places both he walks hither and away, knowing (the way).
could not restrain it. Visnu [2] was another god; he said, 'Visnu, come hither; we will grasp that by
Whose greatness the dear world-halves have not measured, no, nor conceived the might of him the
c Thou art taken with a support; thou art seated in holy lore; for the guardians of the ear, &c., do I take
That do I bring here to thee that thou mayst rejoice in it,
7. Thou art born of the gods, thou art Soma's good friend. Be thou propitious to my in-breathing and my outbreathing, and to this eye of mine!
14 O Protector Devas! Let not slumber or idle talk, critical of others, overtake us.
45 Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, hath flowed in stream as a flood speeding
Asvins, the Rsi is prepared, your raiser, with his song of praise. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call.
7 Come with the mighty Rbhus, Indra, come to us, strengthening with thy help the singer's holy praise;
Thou, very wise, wast Mena, Vrsanaiva's child: those deeds of thine must all be told at Soma feasts.
7 Yea, at thy birth, when thou hadst sat in glory, thou, Agni, wast the aim of invocations.
i Of thee, O god Soma, who hast the Adityas for thy troop, who knowest the heart, who belongest to the
Praised with our homage even as Atri praised thee, O Agni, be the guardian of our bodies.
f O divine straw, lot me not hit thee either across or along,
Send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do us injury.
he should breathe across; verily he unites cross-breathing with cross-breathing; having put down the
12 Wherewith we may o'ercome our rivals in the war, o'erpowering the foe's designs.
swell both Indra and Soma. 'Make thy comrades to .swell with wealth and skill', he says. The priests are
Its rays, whose root is high above, stream downward. Deep may they sink within us, and be hidden.
2. To Soma come the cows, the milch-kine longing, to Soma sages with their hymns inquiring.
15 I sacrificing serve thee with oblations and crave with longing thy good-will and friendship.
h Thou art the skin of Aditi, may the earth' recognize thee [1].
5 Inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee, we and our wealthy nobles have awakened.
Burn up the foolish ones, the flesh-devourers: let none of them escape thine heavenly arrow.
They have been first to drink the flowing Soma juice, first to enjoy the milky fluid of the stalk.
3 The holy statutes rest by thee, as 'twere with ladles that o'erflow.
the Maruts on the Garhapatya, for the prevention of confusion. (The offering) for the Maruts is on seven
May the wind in the atmosphere auspiciously bestow upon thee strength, may the four quarters of the heaven be
Release us from the noose of Varuna; keep us from sorrow, in your tender loving-kindness.
4 Ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong in your splendour and like kings for conquest;
connected with Mitra; he sets it down with a verse addressed to Varuna; verily he unites it with its own
the left side autumn, the middle winter, the layers the first half-months, the mortar the second halfmonths, the bricks the days and nights; this is the fire resting on the seasons; he who knows thus, for him
3 Shake down, O Slayer of the foe, those great all splendid enemies.
touch Agni with mind, with ghee', he says, for with mind man approaches the sacrifice; 'who lordeth it
16 Still as of old, whatever rite Atharvan, Manus sire of all,
54. Having fashioned by means of songs the high (mountains), Rohita spake to the earth: In thee all shall be born,
d O upabhrt, come hither, the god Savitr summons thee for the sacrifice
1. AGNI at dawn, and Indra we invoke at dawn, and Varuna and Mitra, and the Asvins twain.
5. We know, O gâyânya, thy origin, whence thou didst spring. How canst thou slay there, in whose house we offer
Indra was unsettled. He ran up to Prajapati; he gave him this (rite) of twenty-one nights; he grasped it,
2 The Sun ascending, the refulgent Star, pours down his beams together with the Dawn.
be gone, he yet lives. The Hotr loosens him that is swallowed by Soma and Rudra and he is liable to be
5 This young exhilarating juice looks downward from its place in heaven,
beams pointing east, the sacrificer approaches the world of the gods. He covers it over, for the world of
14 Among ihe gunahotras strong for you is this sweet gladdening draught.
14 I crave thy powers, I crave thy mighty friendship: full many a team goes to the Vrtra-slayer.
place he makes her smell the wooden tub near the Ahavaniya fire, saying,
conflict sacrifice with this offering; he should offer to Agni, the forward, a cake on eight potsherds, to
Bold thoughts are in your heads, your weapons in your cars, all glorious majesty is moulded on your
2 Thou sentest forth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou dravest forth the kine, thou drankest
then shall ye distribute through me, verily with me as deity may your Soma (draughts) be set down' [2].
21 The fairest courser of them all, who runneth on as 'twere to heaven.
8 When as a spark he cometh near the ocean, still looking with a vulture's eye to heaven,
2. Set forth the gleaming one, the song-inspirer, not foolish with. the foolish, fort-destroyer,
l May the Vasus fill thee with the Gayatri metre, in the manner of Angiras: may the Rudras fill thee with
In no unready house give us, O Indra invoked of many, food and drink when hungry.
2 Make our songs penetrate to him who is the Only One of men;
sacrifice which is performed that is omitted becomes rotten; be puts down the Açvin (bricks); the Açvins
white tails. Three are the brilliances of the sun, in the spring in the morning; in the summer at midday; in
24. May this sacrificial ladle (sruk), the second hand of Aditi, which the seven Rishis, the creators of the beings,
Rapidly hath he moved along his mother earth; he stands in high heaven's dwelling-place.
They enjoy a long, happy life in this world and indeed attain immortality.
13. With the bolt which Brihaspati, the descendant of Angiras, did, mould into a weapon for the destruction of the
Yoking red horses to and fro thou goest between you Deities and mortal races.
2 So battle now, O Indra and thou, Agni, for cows and waters, sunlight, stolen Mornings.
Thou fittest them for living,-at your glad carouse-looking upon all beings. Thou art waxing great.
past [2], the Brhat the future; verily he cuts him off from the past and the future. The Rathantara is the
6 Come to the worshipper's abode, Asvins, who here is lauding you,
perform the Mahavrata after the Chandomas; verily they maintain the sequence of speech, and the
3 When Indra and the Angirases desired it, Sarama found provision for her offipring.
6. This Soma hath been pressed for thee, O Indra: bold one, mightiest, come!
Exalted, worshipped with our gifts and homage, who knoweth holy Law, to drink sweet Soma.
gods. 'Let the god Savitr anoint thee with honey', he says; verily he anoints it with glory. 'O plant, guard
means of it Prajapati reached the supreme goal. He furnished Indra with it, and by means of it Indra
9 With saving might that must be praised and lauded, Indra, ascend thy car to smite down Vrtra.
in front that for Indra and Vayu, therefore in front he speaks with speech; in front that for Mitra and
2. Grown mighty in his strength, of ample vigour, he as a strikes fear into the Dasa,
9. The strong youths have come forth to view, to show their strength, God Savitar's quickening energy:
1.2.34 Mantra 34 – Maruts (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
water, roots, plants, what grows on ploughed land, what grows on unploughed land, tame and wild cattle
18 We make a hundred of thy kine, yea, and a thousand, hasten nigh:
All-Gods, to day in this our great assembly rejoice, ye Holy, in the gifts we offer.
illness is long; verily thereby in the middle he puts (things) in order for him. These (offerings) also [3]
7 Whatever, God, in sacrifice we mortals have wrought is all for thee, strong, wise of purpose!
talk, but those who are smart, are careful in selecting their husband.
attendant. They were deprived of the Soma drink; they besought the gods for the Soma drink; the gods
1. THESE, Heaven and Earth, bestow prosperity on all, sustainers of the region, Holy Ones and wise,
Impetuous as a bear, O Maruts, is youi rush terrible as a dreadful bull..
Sacrifice, or yajña, should be performed in divine consciousness as an offering to the Supreme Lord. However, people vary in their understanding, and hence perform sacrifice in different manners with dissimilar consciousness. Persons with lesser understanding, and wanting material rewards, make offerings to the celestial gods. Others with deeper understanding of the meaning of yajña offer their own selves as sacrifice to the Supreme. This is called ātma samarpaṇ, or ātmāhutī, or offering one’s soul to God. Yogi Shri Krishna Prem explained this very well: “In this world of dust and din, whenever one makes ātmāhutī in the flame of divine love, there is an explosion, which is grace, for no true ātmāhutī can ever go in vain.” But what is the process of offering one’s own self as sacrifice? This is performed by surrendering oneself completely to God. Such surrender has six aspects to it, which have been explained in verse 18.66. Here, Shree Krishna continues to explain the different kinds of sacrifice that people perform.
2 Thou wanderest far, O Indra, through the spheres of light and realms of earth, the region, thou whom
to whom shall we offer him?' Now then the earth was small, plants were not born, they offered the
6 As thou, O Indra, to the ancient singers wast ever joy, as water to the thirsty,
May God-sent riches come for our possession: further ye us with your delightful succours.
he makes creatures abide steadfast with him. He who desires offspring should offer to Vayu of the team;
2 Eruption that appears upon the twofold joints, and that which overspreads the ankles and the knees,
3 Be thou best Vrtra-slayer, best granter of bliss, most liberal:
2 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman! for his aid, in whose sustaining hand of old,
Arjun was struck with amazement and deep reverence on seeing that breathtaking spectacle. It struck devotional chords in his heart that evoked paroxysms of delight. The elation experienced through devotional sentiments occasionally finds expression in physical symptoms. The bhakti scriptures describe eight such symptoms, or the aṣhṭa sāttvic bhāv, that sometimes manifests in devotees when their heart gets thrilled in devotion:stambha swedo ’ tha romāñchaḥ svarabhedo ’tha vepathuḥvaivarṇyamaśhru pralaya ityaṣhṭau sātvikāḥ smṛitāḥ(Bhakti Rasāmṛit Sindhu)[v1]“Becoming stupefied, sweating, horripilation, choking of the voice, trembling, complexion becoming ashen, shedding tears, and fainting—these are the physical symptoms by which intense love in the heart sometimes manifests.” That is what Arjun experienced as his hair began standing on end. Bowing down in reverence with folded hands, he uttered the words that follow. What Arjun said is now described in the next seventeen verses.
Free me from Yama's fetter, from sin and offence against the Gods.
4. If your mind has wandered to a distance, or has been enchained here or there, then do we turn it hither: may
1. Vayu, the bright is offered thee, best of the meath at holy rites.
4 Now for the mortal worshipper, O Heroes, for him who served you, was the gift of riches.
Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Cumuri, lists to Dabhiti for his faithful spirit's sake.
3 As the birds spread their sheltering wings let your protection cover us.
3 Thou, honouring this our sacrifice, O Indra, shalt give us strength and fill us full of courage.
What time upon your golden wheels he saw you, wild boars rushing about with tusks of iron.
May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
within the sacrificial altar, the other outside; then he repeats, to hold the ways apart and to avoid conflict
3 Mark closely, Maghavan, the words I utter, this eulogy recited by Vasistha:
knows thus offers the remnants of the mixed (Soma), Rudra has no designs against his cattle.
For then, O Heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise shall cease no more.
c The gods that sit in the east, led by Agni; that sit in the south, led by Yama; that sit in the west, led by
6 Flow, Gold-hued, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer: let thy juice go to Indra to support him.
sacrifice with a thousand; verily he produces and gives (it). He who has sacrificed with a thousand
2. Like a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath stepped forth from the great enclosure:
4 Here is your portion laid for you, ye Holy: come to these songs of ours, O ye Nasatyas.
desires a village should offer (a beast) with dappled thighs to Indra with the Maruts. Verily he has
7 This is the mother, this the sire, this one hath come to be thy life.
thou oft implored (god)! May we foremost among rulers, unharmed, gain wealth by our cunning devices!
10. For in thy might thou stretchest out beyond the mansions of the sky.
He who cometh at the call of the generous doer of good deeds [1],
2.1.5.5 Mantra 5: The Mantras for the Adoration of the Ahavinya
the Pañcadaça; verily they win power (indriyá) [3]. There is a Saptadaça, for the winning of food; verily
6 Mitra, ye Gods with wandering eyes, would that the worshippers and we
the secondary Vasat; if he were to do so, he would let Rudra go after his offspring; if he were not to do
Even these Twain, these Goddesses, through terror of Indra's might, retire from his dominion.
gods is the metres, the Gayatri, Tristubh, and Jagati. The Gayatri is the Jyotistoma, the Tristubh, the
What time thou, Indra, with thy spiky weapon, thy deadly bolt, smotest the face of Vrtra.
2. Full springs of fatness, sovran Kings, Mitra and Varuna, the twain,
O Agni, guard the spots which cattle love: thou, life of all, hast gone from lair to lair.
Take your place, ye who know your proper station: be near, be very near unto our Soma.
3 Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks not hymns of praise,
way', 'Coming to earth, O steed', he says; verily he wishes for it with the first and obtains it with the
O Soma, as most rich in sweets for Indra, Visnu, and the Gods.
6 1, I crushed Navavastva of the lofty car, the Dasa, as the Vrtra-slayer kills the fiends;
13 Ye dwellers with Vivasvan come, auspicious, as to Manu erst;
Then the wind following blows upon his splendour, and, straight, the path is black which thou hast
The sacrifice of him whose offering is too large is unsuccessful; 'Surya, the god, for those that sit in the
choose', he says; verily he gives Çamyu Barhaspatya his portion. 'Success to the sacrifice, success to the
calling aloud; verily fastening misfortune on another they attain support. When ten (cows) make a
I WE choose Agni the messenger, the herald, master of all wealth,
strength. Now power and strength depart from him who goes to the assembly; let him who is about to go
17 Trta, when buried in the well, calls on the Gods to succour him.
6 That Varuna's high worth may shine preeminent, these Twain have measured each his proper power
in front the sacrificer smites away his enemies; therefore offspring are engendered behind, and are
enemy', he says; verily he tramples with the thunderbolt on the evil foe; 'from the lordship of Rudra', he
9. In every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to succour us,
Of this thy close attendant, hast thou drunken. God, send the singer food with milk to grace it.
4 Far famed is this the Bharata's own Agni he shineth like the Sun with lofty splendour.
1. Take hold of this (charm) that subjects to immortality (life), may thy life unto old age not be cut off! I bring to
4 Fleet as swift steeds, thy drops, divine, thought-swift, have been, O Pavamana, poured with milk into
the goat, resting in wealth', he says; verily in these worlds he makes it find support. 'In the sky be thy
a This is thy body, O pure one. This is thy splendour. With it be united. Win brightness.
2. Brought forth together with wisdom and potent strength thou grewest great: with hero deeds
6 Go swift to battles, to the sacrifice: set up a flag, a hero for the folk.
f He knows thy [2] loving kindliness, O most youthful one,
3. Bring health to cattle with thy flow, health to the people, health, to steeds,
4 Flow hitherward, O Indu, sweet to Indra and to Visnu: guard
4 List, Heroes, to the singer's call, the call of Krsna lauding you,
4 Gladly the Gods have let themselves be honoured, milking the copious streams of holy Order.
4 Grasping his thunderbolt with both hands, Indra made its edge most keen, for hurling, like a carvingknife for Ahi's slaughter made it keen.
through me as lord of the house, mayst thou be a good lord of the house; for a hundred winters, this
To Visnu hail! To Visnu the Nikhuryapa hail! To Visnu the Nibhuyapa hail!
2 Surya is he: throughout the wide expanses shall Indra turn him, swift as car-wheels, hither,
undying oblation', (with these words) he puts down the naturally perforated brick and offers [3]; that is
Fair-formed, of different hues and yet one-minded, Night and Dawn clash not, neither do they tarry.
15 Flow on, O Soma, for the great Viewer of men, for gain of Idne
2. Those whom they call the attendant pair of Kasyapa who knows the light,
4.11.9 Sukta 9 – Prayer to Arbudi and Nyarbudi for help in Battle
3 May blessed Mornings shine on us for ever, with wealth of kine, of horses, and of heroes,
on it he sees. Having offered to Aditi, he repeats the verse to the Maruts. The Maruts are the subjects of
Come to us quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the Kanvas drink thy fill!
8. The King whose face is decked with oil is kindled with homage offered by his faithful servant.
May well attract, with prayer and hands uplifted, the Priest of Heaven and Earth, true Sacrificer.
3. Yea, Indra in the joys of this obtains the grasp that gathers spoil,
Set thou beneath the Gods, Vasu, above mankind, the speech of the intelligent.
We claim alliance with the very glorious one, yea, with the
deaths, of which, it is said, there are a hundred more!
So thou with priests bast blown away the Dasyu, and those who worship not with those who worship.
a That body of yours, to be striven for, 'O Indra and Varuna, with that do ye free this one from
8 Far over ninety spacious floods thy thunderbolts were cast abroad:
17 The Varsagiras unto thee, O Indra, the Mighty One, sing forth this laud to please thee,
sword, one-third the chariot, one-third the sacrificial post; the interior reeds which were crushed became
4.4.17 Sukta 17 – Charm with the Apamarga plant, against Sorcery, Demons and Enemies
3 O Singer, with the singers, O Gracious, with those who move at dawn,
the earth) from heaven, with a thousand eyes do they watch over the earth.
to him; people are fain to give to him. He should offer an oblation to Aryaman who desires, 'May I go
They are like steeds who come into the race-course, those men who call aloud on Indra-Agni.
6 Refreshing is your voice, O Mitra-Varuna: Parjanya sendeth out a wondrous mighty voice.
The young Maids brook not that none seeks to win them, when, Quickeners of all! they scatter
5 With newest hymn I call those Wonder-Workers, ancient and brilliant, and exceeding mighty,
Our sacrifices with our homage unto him much-lauded, very rich, for help:
2. The swans, the Vrishagnas from anear us, restless, have brought their clamour to our dwelling-Friends come to Pavamana, meet for praises-and sound in concert their resistless music.
that is in our mind; all that, O Arbudi, do thou make the enemies see, and spectres also make them see!
4 Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men, bow down,
being of double seed, is born as the least of animals, for Agni burns his place of birth. Now he is
9 They with perceptions of the heart in secret resort to that which spreads a thousand branches.
7 Ye, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the comely maid of Purumitra as a bride.
2.5.5.3 Mantra 3: The Pan, the Head of the Man, and the Vamabhrt Brick
11 May Pusan come, and Bhaga, Lord of wealth, All-bounteous, for our weal
has been offered; one portion he should cut off from in front of the navel, another behind it; the
Help us with manifold assistance, Indra: Migthy One, Indra, make us yet more wealthy.
1. MAY mighty Heaven and Earth, most meet for honour, be present here with light and gleaming
People whose minds are attached to sensual enjoyment concern themselves with bhog (gratification), and aiśhwarya (luxury). They engage their intellects in enhancing their income and contemplating how to increase their material possessions and maximize their enjoyment. Bewildered in this manner, they are unable to develop the firm resolve required for traversing the path to God-realization.
1. The god-begotten plant, hated by the wicked, which wipes away the curses (of the enemies), like water a foul
3 By royal Soma's and by Varuna's decree, under Brhaspati's and Anumati's guard,
O Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid: make plenteous food stream forth for us.
3. The blood-sucking demon, and him that tries to rob (our) health, Kanva, the devourer of our offspring, destroy,
of gods, the piler of the fire of men; therefore when it rains a piler of the fire should not run, for he has
enclosing-sticks of Buteafrondosa which lie around are in truth his brothers.'
He places eight (bricks); the Gayatri has eight syllables, Agni is connected with the Gayatri; verily he
3. Evening is come: sing loudly thou Atharvan's nobly singing son:
who (piles it) according to the deity does not fall a victim to the deities; he becomes richer. With a
h The breath of the sacrificer is apart from the victim;
Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
Vouchsafe us food, prosperity, and progeny, and lengthen out our days that we may see long life.
2 High in the seat of heaven is spread the Scorcher's sieve: its threads are standing separate, glittering
10 You, even such, pure in your might, you, O ye Maruts, I invoke
17 He whom for furnishing a hundred wethers to the she-wolf, his wicked father blinded,
3 As erst for Tugra's son your car, sea-crossing, strong, was equipped and set amid the waters,
about the Stotra of the Sodaçin; in this world Indra slew Vrtra; verily straightway be hurls the bolt
e The Aditya (cup) is these cattle, Agni is Rudra here, having cast plants in the fire he offers the Aditya
For I in truth am fierce and strong and mighty. I bent away from every foeman's weapons.
Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble: from grief that comes from heaven mid-air preserve
The Golden-hued is poured forth, with his hundred streams, Wealth-bringer, lifting up his voice while
9 She who hath knowledge Of the first day's nature is born refulgent white from out the darkness.
2 Like as the watery ocean, so doth he receive the rivers spread on all sides in their ample width.
On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.
shall know them thus'. It is the year which repels from support him who having piled up the fire does not
(place) the Raksases infest the sacrifice. In that he takes of the Vahantis, that part of the sacrifices lies
sacrificer draws this libation, being above other people. He draws with the Çukra vessel; (the cup) for
2. On his left hip the hero hath reclined himself: the proffered feast offends him not.
2 Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, and fill thee full, O Lord of Tawny Horses.
9 Like swan's that flee in lengthened line, the Pillars have come to us arrayed in brilliant coIour.
should offer to Brhaspati a bull and a cow; verily he has recourse to Brhaspati with his own share; verily
downfall. He is in favor with neither God nor men. The rich person who does not share is a sinner.
With song the wise and skilful consecrate him: his voice the God-adoring singer utters.
offspring- Prajapati is sixteenfold. (verily it serves) to gain Prajapati. (A roof of) twenty-one coverings
He, Lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the earth and heaven.
2 The smith with ripe and seasoned plants, with feathers of the birds of air,
8 Lovers of sweetness, Rudras, she who streams with sweetness waits on you.
To Aditi hail! To Aditi the great hail! To Aditi the gentle hail!
The lightning seemed to flash, as cowards planned it. The minstrels bleated like a lamb in trouble.
5 These are thy great deeds, Indra, thine, the Mighty, deeds to be told aloud at all libations,
2.2.3.11 Mantra 11: Offerings for one Long-diseased and one desiring Life
2. The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, O Pavamana, King!
Like friendly-minded kinsmen, come at our desire, O Gods, and shake down treasures on us from
b Thou art taken with a support; to Indra with the Maruts thee!
by the bundle (vedena) the gods won (avindanta) the desirable wealth of the Asuras, and that is why the
To whom, Adityas, ye have lent your shelter that extendeth far.
When she, yet unimpregnate, hath conceived thee, even when newly born thou art an envoy.
3 He, verily, who honours thee with fuel, Knower of all life,
25 The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of Soma juice,
down, may he smite away from us misfortune', he says, for support. 'O plants, do ye rejoice [9] in him',
May he vouchsafe us gear with gold to grace it: may Pusan make each prayer of ours efective.
9. Soma, while thou art cleansed, most dear and watchful in the sheep's long wool, most like to Angiras! thou hast
thunderbolt against him; the strew is made of Çara grass; verily he crushes him; the kindling-wood is of
be cut off. He attains prosperity, be obtains cattle who knows thus. 'The bright with the bright for thee I
12 Thou, Agni Jatavedas, when entreated, didst bear the offerings which thou madest fragrant,
16 The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who comes to what is good by distant pathway,May she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with us under the Gods' protection
18. Through holy disciplehood the maiden obtains a young husband, through holy disciplehood the steer, the
15 If, Maruts, ye regard the praise recited here at this mighty singer invocation,
1. THIS hymn will I make for the Marut host who bright in native splendour cast the mountains down.
11 Is he a brother when no lord is left her? Is she a sister when Destruction cometh?
7 Lovely of form art thou, alike on every side; though far, thou shinest brightly
1. LET us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser's sacrifice:
created, the lord of beings was the overlord. They praised with seven, the seven seers were created,
1. AGNI is wakened: Surya riseth from the earth. Mighty, refulgent Dawn hath shone with all her light.
Visnu fumigate thee in the manner of Angiras; may Varuna fumigate thee in the manner of Angiras.
Deep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won by victory the right of being first invoked.
30 O Pavamana, bless us, so that we may live, with that bright milk
They in courageous might still waxing boldly have compassed round their foemen like an ocean.
living thing, O earth, moves in the rainy season, shall, when it creeps, not creep upon us: with what is auspicious
1. High sounds the voice of the drum, that acts the warrior, the wooden (drum), equipped with the skin of the cow.
1. May Agni, worshipped, bring us bliss: may the gift, blessed one! and sacrifice bring bliss,
team; the team is his support; verily, being supported he attains prosperity to avoid being burnt; he
23 Controlling priests and sages skilled in holy song adorn thee well:
13. Destroy the takman that returns on (each) third day, the one that intermits (each) third day, the one that
5 May Rbhu send prosperity for battle, may Vaja conquering in the fight protect us.
5 O Indra, bring us name and fame, enriching, mightiest, excellent,
3. O Soma, being purified, bring us from all sides-for thou canstRiches and food with hero sons!
3 Impetuous is their strength, and keen the lightning of the mighty Pair,
support verily he places radiance in himself. There is a Trinava (Stoma), for conquest. There is a
Ye drave away, ye put to death the foemen, and took great vengeance with your murdering weapons.
Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brhaspati, Savitar yield him for a hundred!
S. O Indra, lover of the song, we are the singers of thy praise
Heroes! we cry trembling in fear before you, even in the greatness of your power have mercy.
Who quickly hath brought near Mitra and Varuna. to share his sacrificial gifts.
Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into the rivers from their bands.
21. A hundred years, ten thousand years, two, three, four ages (yuga) do we allot to thee; Indra and Agni, and all
11 O Food, from thee as such have we drawn forth with lauds, like cows, our sacrificial gifts,
5. Where our pious friends live joyously, having left behind the ailments of their bodies, to that world the mother of
13 The Rusamas, O Agni, sent me homeward with fair adornment and with kine in thousands.
12. He that refuses to give the cow of the gods to the descendants of the Rishis who ask for it, infringes upon the
Where all these creatures dwell unseen, with poison have infected me.
12 From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him, these. holy words, these Rcas, songs and
2 The Son of Angirases, meeting the cattle, as Bhaga, brought in Aryaman among us.
As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens on to the. chose meeting-place, the beaker.
b Thou art taken with a support; to the Adityas thee!
With Druhyu, or with Anu, Yadu, Turvaga, I call you hither; come to me.
15 Four youthful sons of Masarsara vex me, three, of the king, the conquering Ayavasa.
food, (serving) for prosperity. Morning and evening were those of the Asuras, without a middle, a
16 The hero's side who drank the dressed oblation, Indra's denier, far o'er earth he scattered.
The Five Tribes whom he loveth well have entered the light he loveth that was made aforetime.
The Amar Kosh (ancient Sanskrit dictionary that is widely respected) defines vibhūti as vibhūtir bhūtir aiśhwaryam [v17] (power and wealth). God’s powers and wealth are unlimited. Actually, everything about him is unlimited. He has unlimited forms, unlimited names, unlimited abodes, unlimited descensions, unlimited pastimes, unlimited devotees, and so on. Hence, the Vedas refer to him by the name anant (unlimited):anantaśhchātmā viśhwarūpo hyakartā(Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad 1.9)[v18]“God is infinite and manifests in innumerable forms in the universe. Although he administers the universe, he is yet the non-doer.” The Ramayan states:hari ananta hari kathā anantā [v19]“God is unlimited, and the pastimes he enacts in his unlimited Avatārs are also unlimited.” Sage Ved Vyas goes to the extent of saying:yo vā anantasya guṇānanantān anukramiṣhyan sa tu bāla-buddhiḥrajānsi bhūmer gaṇayet kathañchit kālena naivākhilaśhakti dhāmnaḥ(Bhāgavatam 11.4.2)[v20]“Those who think they can count the glories of God have a childish intellect. We may be successful in counting the specks of dust on the crest of the earth, but we can never count the unlimited glories of God.” Therefore, Shree Krishna says here that he will only be describing a small fraction of his vibhūtis.
Him, clad in robes of milk, swift fingers beautify on the third height and in the luminous realm of heaven.
three; verily in order he bestows brilliance on him. They are offered in the course of the year; the year is
them. The breath is the wind; in that having put down the seasonal (bricks) he puts down the breath-sup
1. WE will invoke this day your car, farspreading, O Asvins, even the gathering, of the sunlight,Car praised in hymns, most ample, rich in treasure, fitted with seats, the car that beareth Surya.
In all encounters strengthen thou our prayer to be a help to us.
All falsehood, Mitra-Varuna! ye conquer, and closely cleave unto the Law Eternal.
Ne'er may the tawny God, fair-checked, and gracious, swifthearing, yield us to this evil purpose.
4 On high your way to sacrifice was made ready; the radiant flames went upward to the regions.
7 Flow onward, Soma in a stream, effused to gladden Indra's heart,
These are the laws of Varuna and Mitra. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to injure us.
Thou capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught; thou slewest Namuci, thou slewest Vrtra.
4 One in the heaven on high hath made his dwelling, on earth and in the firmament the other.
5 His Mother's suitor I address. May he who loves his Sister hear,
9 Friends, when thejuices flow, replenish duly your own, your bounteous Indra with the Soma.
12 Indra, the Gotamas who bring thee praises have grown strong by thee.
not available to non-believers and those who indulge in sinful actions. Prayers and worship by sinners
As such, O Bhaga, all with might invoke thee: as such be thou our Champion here, O Bhaga.
1. THE pressers from the Soma-press send forth thy juice for rapturous joy
This Indu stole away the warlike weapons, and foiled the arts of his malignant father.
31 Thus he, sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds thunder, gives us strength,
37. In Rohita who conquers wealth, conquers cattle, and conquers booty, heaven and earth are fixed. Of thee that
Straightway the Bold One left the fiends behind him and passed the winds as he grew yet more mighty.
you. Protect our wealth whether in our possession or yet to come. Cherish us forever with your
'The oblation is the sacrifice; let us have a share in it.' He said, 'Lot them offer to you the portions of the
Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice's holy statute.
With drops that bless and seem to smile he cometh: the waters fall, the clouds utter their thunder.
Help us, O liberal Agni, in the strife for spoil, so that we may o'ercome all things that trouble us,
4 He who bestows a noble guerdon on the priest wins fame that never shall decay.
That the milk-giving cows may, unimpeded call to the sacred grass the Gods' assembly.
4 Out of desire of cows and steeds and horses. potent Soma-drops,
The glorious Bull, invoked, hath stood at Kanva's side: loud neighed the Steed in frays for kine.
1. RUBBED into life, well stablished in the dwelling, Leader of sacrifice, the Sage, the youthful,
f He who piles the fire is made into an offering; just as an offering spills, so he spills who having piled
Like stags the Sons of Dyatis have striven onward, the Sons of Aditi grown strong like pillars.
Pramlocanti [1] and Anumlocanti his Apsarases, his missile the serpents, his weapon tigers.
Maruts, accept this thousandfold allotment of household sacrifice and household treasure.
17 Wherewith Patharva, in his majesty of form, shone in his course like to a gathered kindled fire;
So loose thou too his thought who hath effused the sap, and let the Stones which we are honouring be
Borne on their swift wings let your beauteous horses, your birds of ruddy hue, convey you near us.
Now verily the far-refulgent Mornings, Daughters of Heaven, bring welfare to the people.
5 Bring forward, Asvins, Gods, to its fulfilment my never-wearied prayer that asks for riches.
9 Whether, O Indra-Agni, ye be dwelling in lowest earth, in central, or in highest.
With Indra joined ye drove away misfortunes, yea foes of Prthusravas, O ye mighty.
5 He rushes hurrying like a steed to Soma that adorns our rite,
4 There, Indra, while the light was won, the Panis f1ed, 'neath a hundred blows, for wise Dasoni,
Shree Krishna explains in this verse the external practice for sādhanā. Śhuchau deśhe means a pure or sanctified place. In the initial stages, the external environment does impact the mind. In later stages of sādhanā, one is able to achieve internal purity even in dirty and unclean places. But for neophytes, clean surroundings help in keeping the mind clean as well. A mat of Kuśh grass provides temperature insulation from the ground, akin to the yoga mats of today. The deer skin atop it deters poisonous pests like snakes and scorpions from approaching while one is absorbed in meditation. If the āsan is too high, there is the risk of falling off; if the āsan is too low, there is danger of disturbance from insects on the ground. Some instructions regarding external seating given in this verse may be somewhat anachronous to modern times, in which case the spirit of the instruction is to be absorbed in the thought of God, while the instructions for the internal practice remain the same.
o We have come to the place on earth for sacrifice to the gods,
4 With glittering ornaments they deck them forth for show; for beauty on their breasts they bind their
1. With this mine homage I invoke Agni for you, the Son of Strength.
1. Whenever yonder person in his thought, and with his speech, offers sacrifice accompanied by oblations and
share; verily they subject his fellows to him; he becomes possessed of a village. Having cut off from
2 Smote swiftly forts, and gambara, then Yadu and that Turvaga,
4 Soon as he sprang to life he forced asun. der hosts: forward the Hero looked to manly deed and war.
2. May we agree in mind and thought, may we not struggle with one another, in a spirit displeasing to the gods!
8 With wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested power and might,
brought forth in front [4]. The altars are the breaths; if the Adhvaryu were to go past the altars to the
The gods having repeated the Samidhenis could not see the sacrifice. Prajapati in silence performed the
4 Wondrous, with hundred streams, hymned in a thousand songs, Indu pours out for Indra his delightrul
27 From, heaven, from out the firmament, hath Pavamana been effused
May the cow nourish him with milk to feed llim. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
O Vayu, never shall the cows grow thin, never for thee shall they be dry.
4 No troubles vex that King in whose home Indra drinks the sharp Soma juice with milk commingled.
e Be thou refreshment to the fathers, strength to those that sit on
Drink thou this Soma pressed with teeth, accompanied with grain and curds, with cake of meal and
3. The cows, the mothers of the ghee, who lick their young, in whose heart love is planted, shall make yonder
the Upançu (Graha); let the god Savitr set thee free for life, for living,
Is Agni, our first-born of Holy Order, the Milch-cow and the Bull in life's beginning.
1.9.19 Mantra 19 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Asita Kasyapa, Devala Kasyapa)
10 They mourn the living, cry aloud, at sacrifice: the men have set their thoughts upon a distant cast.
3. A male son do thou produce, and after him a male shall be born! Thou shalt be the mother of sons, of those
7 Drinker of Soma, let thy heart incline to give; bring thy Bays hitherward, O thou who hearest praise.
For Indra all libations must be set apart, all man's libations set apart.
Bedewed with holy oil he shineth widely, Agni, the knower of all secret wisdom.
3 On through the long wool of the sheep to the meath-dropping vat he flows:
Giving prosperity, and lovely wealth to him who praiseth thee. So may the God attend the God, true
right wing, by the rains its tail, by the autumn its left wing, by the winter its middle. By the Brahman
brick he put it down, to prevent excessive burning. That on which he is to pile the fire he should stroke,
2 Indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, and then in splendour came to us.
On the back of the vault, above the light of the sky,
1. Protect us, Indra, each to-day, each to morrow, and each following day!
11 Thy birth hath made me drink from earthly milch-kine: this power, Pururavas, hast thou vouchsafed
9. All thy climbings, advances, and all thy ascents with which thou, (Rohita, the sun), fillest the heavens and the
should also sacrifice with the Sarvastoma.' If they omit the Trivrt Stoma, then his vital airs are omitted,
14 Come quick with swift steeds, for ye have worshippers among Kanva's sons
8 Ye went to him who mourned in a far distant place, him who was left forlorn by treachery of his sire.
So, Agni, loose from us the bonds that bind us, when thou art seated here, O Priest who knowest.
9 The folk, O Mitra-Varuna, who hate you, who sinfully hating pour you no libations,
With fire upon your way, O Maruts loud of voice, with battle, Mighty Ones, achieve your deeds of
8 Mighty is homage: I adopt and use it. Homage hath held in place the earth and heaven.
Decking thyself, thou makest bare thy bosom, shining in majesty, thou Goddess Morning.
pressing with eleven [3]. The third pressing belongs to the All-gods with the Rbhus. In that they offer to
Once spiritual sentiments have sprouted, they cannot be wiped out. The soul with devotional sanskārs (tendencies and impressions) from the present and past lifetimes gets naturally inspired toward spirituality. Such an individual feels drawn toward God, and this pull is also referred to as “the call of God.” Based upon the past sanskārs the call of God sometimes becomes so strong that it is said, “The call of God is the strongest call in one’s life.” People who experience it reject the entire world and the advice of their friends and relatives to tread the path that draws their heart. That is how in history, great princes, noblemen, wealthy businesspersons, etc. renounced the comfort of their worldly position to become ascetics, yogis, sages, mystics, and swamis. And since their hunger was for God alone, they naturally rose above the ritualistic practices prescribed in the Vedas for material advancement.
8 He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath found for us the way to dwell in safety.
19 O Agni, Lord and Master of men's homesteads, with kindled fuel we have made thee mighty.
Formed in his Mother he is Matarisvan; he hath, in his course, become the rapid flight of wind.
Bringers of bliss to him who lauds and praises, bestowing varied bounties on the singer.
eight (verses) he draws across [3]; the Gayatri has eight syllables, the fire is connected with the Gayatri;
For Varuna, whose form is Law, place offerings for his great delight.
Agni, the sire of Kasyapa by faith, the mother, Manu, Sage.
6 Yea, by tradition from the ancient sages they brought great strength from the two mighty Parents,
The streams of milk move, as most wondrous sunlight, the beauty of the Lovely One for glory.
prospered in this world, by the metres in yonder world; the hymn of Vatsapri is the type of the Stoma; in
Wherewith ye bear your servant over trouble, and free your worshipper from scoff and scorning.
d May the Dhisanas, the goddesses connected with the All-gods, kindle thee on the abode of earth, in the
13 Borne on their flashing car, the spear-armed Maruts, the nimble Youths of Heaven, the Sons of
1. Now do I glorify their mighty cohort, the company of these the youthful Maruts,
3 Impetuous as a bull, he chose the Soma and in three sacred beakers drank the juices.
Blasting away the Dasyu with your trumpet, ye gave far-spreading light unto the Arya.
he consecrated; verily also he conquers both the worlds, that of him who has offered the royal
15 Indra, who rules through all his powers heroic, hath with his majesty filled earth and heaven.
2 Giver of growth to plants, the God who ruleth over the waters and all moving creatures,
1. This, even this, O Indra, we implore: as thy devoted friends,
2 Cyavana, purposing deceptive presents, with all ingredients, made the altar ready.
23 He, Excellent, withholdeth not his gift of power and wealth in kine,
13 Indra, we know thee breaker-down even of trong forts, winner of spoil,
1. HE only is the Sea, holder of treasures: born many a time he views the hearts within us.
1. INVITE ye Indra with a song to drink your draught of Soma juice,
2. O Agni, be our nearest friend, yea, our protector and our kind deliverer!
defeated; he who knowing thus brings the Anvaharya prospers himself, his foe is defeated. By the
9. By virtue of the compact which thou, O Brihaspati, didst close with Indra and Brahman, by virtue of that
33. The sterile cow is the mother of the man of royal caste: thus was it from the beginning. It is said to be no (real)
The humped, the bull, the dwarf (animal), these are for Indra and Varuna; the one with white hump, the
3 To Indra, Vayu, Varuna, to Visnu, and the Maruts, flow
Developed, vast in form, with those who sing forth praise, a youth, no more a child, he cometh to our
13 Worthy of laud, O Agni, is that kinship which thou hast with Gods.
3. Make firm their roots, draw out their ends, expand their middle., O herb! May thy hairs grow as reeds, may they
7 Here, urged by hands, loudly hath rung the press-stone wherewith Navagvas through ten months
2 Robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty Sage pronouncing invocations.
Shree Krishna explains that the destiny awaiting the souls is based upon the guṇas of their personalities. We get what we deserve is God’s law, the law of karma. Those who cultivated virtues, knowledge, and a service attitude toward others are born in families of pious people, scholars, social workers, etc. Or else, they go to the higher celestial abodes. Those who permitted themselves to be overcome by greed, avarice, and worldly ambitions are born in families focused on intense material activity, very often the business class. Those who were inclined to intoxication, violence, laziness, and dereliction of duty are born amongst families of drunks and illiterate people. Otherwise, they are made to descend down the evolutionary ladder and are born into the animal species.Many people wonder whether having once attained the human form, it is possible to slip back into the lower species. This verse reveals that the human form does not remain permanently reserved for the soul. Those who do not put it to good use are subject to the terrible danger of moving downward into the animal forms again. Thus, all the paths are open at all times. The soul can climb upward in its spiritual evolution, remain at the same level, or even slide down, based upon the intensity and frequency of the guṇas it adopts.
Agni is threefold [4]; verily he makes Agni attain support through all his extent. Now he casts away
5 Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold great wealth the prize of combat.
a lioness, [2] bestowing increase of wealth; hail! Thou art a lioness, winning (the favour of) the Adityas
9 Those men who step not back and move not forward, nor Brahmans nor preparers of libations,
Thou, Whip, who urgest horses, drive sagacious horses in the fray.
4 He whom the two copartners with observance tend, the pair who dwell together in the same abode,
19 Mother of Gods, Aditi's forui of glory, ensign of sacrifice, shine forth exalted.
6 I pour the water from the well with pails prepared and goodly straps,
with a Gayatri verse, for one who desires power with a Tristubh verse, for one who desires cattle with a
heaven. He should not spread (the bunch) in all directions. If he were to spread (it) in all directions [4], a
earth, I dig Agni of the dust in the manner of Angiras.
thy arrow called young, with it be gentle to us; homage to this of thine;
after-sacrifices, there would be a bursting of the sacrifice; he offers an oblation with a ladle, for the
These eulogies, whereby the sons of Kanva call thee to their aid.
drop milk for him; the people wait upon him in service.
fulfils all wishes for him that gives her (to the Brahmans).
7 Homage and prayer are thine, O Jatavedas, and this my song shall evermore exalt thee.
The Vrtra-slayer vanquisher, of fighting hosts, preeminent, is praised with song.
13 Prepare thyself to grant us that great bounty, O Vasu, for abundant is thy treasure.
2. Your sight shall be as clear (as formerly), your strength as abundant, your lustre as great, your vitality as
eagle, bringer of the Soma, thee, for Visnu thee!' he says; thus he offers (hospitality) to the Gayatri. He
Surya of the sky, Candramas of Naksatras, Brhaspati of holy power, Mitra of truths, Varuna of waters,
5 Now unto us mete riches, while they cleansethee, all-glorious, swelling wealth, with store of heroes.
From the Soma with grain, from the mixed, O Indra, from the pure,
6 Say where, then, is this mighty region's farthest bound, where, Maruts, is the lowest depth that ye
one', he says; verily he sends it to the gods. 'Be the desires of the sacrificer fulfilled', he says; this is the
11. Guide ye those (foes), ye messengers of death; ye messengers of Yama, infold them! Let more than
f Overcome the foe, overcome the foemen of a thousandfold strength [2] art thou; do thou inspirit me.
1. The piercing (arrows) shall not hit us, nor shall the striking arrows hit us! Far away fron, us O Indra, to either
We welcome you to our home so that you may help us get rid of all our troubles and evil ways.
7 Who shall approach the pious? who the man whose sacred grass is trimmed?
4 Thou, dawning, workest fain to light the great world, yea, heaven, Goddess! that it may be seen.
11 Agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacrifice, and was the Gods' preceder.
The cosmic play of the various planes of existence in the universe is astounding. The fourteen worlds and their planetary systems undergo repeated cycles of sṛiṣhṭi, sthiti,andpralaya (creation, preservation, and dissolution). All planetary systems, up to the Mahar Lok, are destroyed at the end of a kalp; that is Brahma’s day of 4.32 billion years. This partial dissolution is called naimittik pralaya. When Shukdev Paramhans narrated the Shrimad Bhagavatam to Parikshit, he stated that Brahma creates these worlds similar to a child playing with his toys. A child builds structures with his toys during the day and pulls them apart before going to bed at night. Similarly, when Brahma wakes up, he creates the planetary systems and their life forms and dissolves them before going to sleep.The entire universe dissolves at the end of Brahma’s life of 100 years (311.04 trillion earth years). The whole material creation winds up. Thepañch-mahābhūtamerge into thepañch-tanmātrās, thepañch-tanmātrāsmerge intoahankār,ahankārmerges intomahān, andmahānmerges intoprakṛiti. Prakṛitiis the subtle form of Maya, the material energy of God.Maya now takes up her primordial form. She goes back into the body of the Supreme Lord, Maha Vishnu. This great dissolution is called prākṛit pralaya, ormahāpralaya. When it is time for the next cycleof creation, Maha Vishnu glances at prakṛiti, and by His mere glance, prakṛiti starts unfolding herself again. Fromprakṛiti,mahānis created, frommahān,ahankār; then fromahankār,pañch-tanmātrāsare created; frompañch-tanmātrās,pañch-mahābhūtaget created. And by this process, unlimited universes are created again.According to modern science, there are 100 billion stars in the Milky Way. And similar to the Milky Way, there are over a billion galaxies in the universe. Thus, scientists have concluded that in our universe, there are more than 10^20 stars. However, the Vedas state that, similar to our universe, there are infinite universes of various sizes and different features. These universes manifest from the body of Maha Vishnu. Every time He breathes in infinite universes are created from the pores of His divine body. And when He breathes out, they dissolve again. Thus, one breath of Maha Vishnu is equal to 100 years of Brahma’s life. Also, all these universes have their own Brahma, Vishnu, and Shankar. In the innumerable universes, there are innumerable Brahmas, Vishnus, and Shankars. The entire creation originates from Maha Vishnu, andat dissolution, merges back into Him.
Send to us wealth containing all things precious: bestow upon us every sort of riches.
20 With worship, him whom men adore, with Soma, him who drinks it most,
become blind, the Raksases would injure the sacrifice [2]. He puts gold down on it before making the
Alone, the never-conquered guardian of mankind, thou smitest down resistless foes.
These Panis who are watchful keepers guard it. In vain hast thou approached this lonely station.
1. THIS Soma hath been pressed for thee, O Indra: come hither, Lord of Bays, for this thou lovest.
They who are full of sin, untrue, unfaithful, they have engendered this abysmal station.
Whence is born a hero [1] of great deeds, of skill,
bestow it. 'O god Savitr, that he [2] hath proclaimed to thee', he says, for impelling. 'Brhaspati is the
19 Look ye on Visnu's works, whereby the Friend of Indra, close-allied,
Ye brought him back in animated vessels, traversing air, unwetted by the billows.
6 Milking the teeming Cow for all-sustaining food. O Wise One, for the worship-loving worshipper,
world of heaven. 'Mount ye, with Agni, to the vault', he says; verily with this he mounts these worlds.
front. He offers evenly; therefore the eyes are even. By Agni the sacrificer discerns the world of the
May the Adityas and the Maruts shelter us. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
And thrice vouchsafe us store of food with plenteous strength, at evening, O ye Asvins, and at break of
2 For Indra were the Somas erst- discovered, whereby he grew strong-jointed, vast, and skilful.
1. May the Earth and the Heavens grant us fearlessness. May the boundless space breathe fearlessness into us.
1. O Agni, thou hast been ordained Hotar of every sacrifice, By Gods, among the race of men.
9 The men come near thee for their gain, the singers with their songs of praise:
2. O Indra, fill thy belly anew with meath that seems to flow from heaven.
Associate with Rjisvan Indra overthrew the solid forts of Pipru, conjuring Asura.
6 Come with abundant blessings, come with perfect care to succour us.
Indra made room for his car-drivcr Kutsa who sate beside him, when he gained the sunlight.
therefore they style this offering the gatherer. He who has foes should in conflict sacrifice with this
Even that may Mitra, Varuna vouchsafe us, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.
Give us a hundred autumns for our lifetime: give us, O fair-checked Indra, store of heroes.
Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from falsehood, poured the waters out when Vrtra died.
7 Lord of the house, whom men must seek, we set thee down, O Worshipped Onel
verily he makes these worlds of even strength; at this height he offers [3], then at this, then at this; these
6 Forthwith thy Bay steeds down the steep, O Indra, forth, crushing foemen, go thy bolt of thunder!
15. They that pierce the sides, bore along the ribs, without doing injury, without causing disease, they shall run off
O King, Vaisvanara, bestow thou on us excellent treasures worthy to belonged fo r.
words) he fastens it, for security. 'For the waters [3] thee, for the plants thee I sprinkle', be says, for from
2 Borne on by rapid steeds of mighty pinion, or proudly trusting in the Gods' incitements.
11 God, Sovran of the Wood, present this our oblation to the Gods,
2 Then Will I, when I lead my friends to battle against the radiant persons of the godless,
Excellent Guardian, bear us well through peril, and lead us on to wealth with careful guidance.
a Supporting holy order, abounding in truth, Agni is the Gandharva; his Apsarases are the plants, called
Distinguished by her bean-is Dawn shines apparent, come forth to all the world with wondrous treasure.
his own share; he bestows food on him; verily he becomes an eater of food. It is brown; that is the colour
make; verily by the form he wins offspring, cattle, the metres; verily also he piles it winning it for
The goat declared the hound to be your wakener. That day, in a full year, ye first unclosed our eyes.
10 O Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu, thou most active, bring
unites them together; the metres are four, Agni's dear body is the metres; verily with his dear body he
3 Savitar therefore gave you immortality, because ye came proclaiming him whom naught can hide;
Thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the Moons: the Father bears the felly portioned out by
For ye are they who guide aright our bodies, ye are the rulers of our speech and vigour.
10 Indra we seek to give us help, from here, from heaven above the earth,
5 Most liberal, best at winning strength, inciters, Lords of splendour who
Now in doing so they really perform in order first the Agnistoma, then the Ukthya, then the Sodaçin,
Thee we invoke, the guest of men, by whose mouth, even as a sire's,
a Departed are those mortals who in days gone by behold
As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they compass Maghavan about that he may
comes not to us; let us both summon her.' The Gandharvas uttered a spell, the gods sang, she went to the
1 THE priests, Vasisthas, are the first awakened to welcome Usas with their songs and praises,
All-speeding, victor, perfecter of sacrifice, the Babe with flawless help hath mustered vigorous might.
wisdom and thought man approaches the sacrifice. 'To Sarasvati, to Pusan, to Agni, hail! 'he says.
11 The pious man, O Jatavedas Agni, to whom thou grantest ample room and pleasure,
1. May we attain that excellent glory of Savitar the God: So may he stimulate our prayers!
Thy light-bestowing head to heaven thou liftest, making thy tongue the oblationbearer, Agni.
offspring, and cattle of his foe; he prospers with himself, his foe is defeated.
In the Vedas, God is referred by many names: Brahman, Bhagwan, Deva, Paramātmā, Praṇa, Puruṣh, Sat, etc. In some places, while referring to His formless aspect, God is said to be Akshar, which means imperishable. The Bṛihadāraṇyak Upaniṣhad states:etasya vā akṣharasya praśhāsane gārgisūryāchandramasau vidhṛitau tiṣhṭhataḥ(3.8.9)“Under the mighty control of the Imperishable, the sun and the moon are held on their course.”Shree Krishna mentions in this verse the word sangraheṇa,which means “in brief.” He says that this path is very difficult to follow and not suitable for everyone. Therefore, He will not elaborate much and briefly describe this path of yog-miśhrā bhakti; that leads to attaining the formless aspect of God. It demands living a life of rigid continence and perform severe austerities. Renouncing worldly desires and practicing brahmacharya, a vow of celibacy. As was previously detailed in verse 6.14, the practice of celibacy conserves a person’s physical energy. This energy, when channelized through sadhana, gets transformed into spiritual energy. It also enhances the intellect and memory power of the sādhaks (spiritual aspirants) and helps them comprehend the spiritual subjects better.
4 O Indra, hear Tirasci's call, the call of him who serveth thee.
6 Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, by night,
Gayatri (verse) addressed to Agni should he stroke the first layer; with a Tristubh the second; with a
Who propped the highest place of congregation, thrice setting down his footstep, widely striding.
them he makes him to fall. 'Be firm, of strong limbs', (with these words) he places (Agni) on the ass [4];
A teacher may know the deepest secret, but he does not necessarily reveal it to the student. Before sharing it, he considers many things, such as the preparedness of the student to receive it, comprehend it, benefit from it, etc. In the beginning of the Bhagavad Gita, Arjun was bewildered by the problems facing him and asked for guidance from Shree Krishna. The Lord enlightened him with great care and consideration, uplifting his understanding a little by little, through the eighteen chapters. Having seen Arjun receive the message so well, Shree Krishna now feels confident that he will be able to grasp the final and most profound knowledge as well. Further, he says iṣhṭo ‘si me dṛiḍhamiti, meaning, “I am speaking this to you because you are my very dear friend. So I care for you deeply and sincerely desire your best interest.”
5 Come to us, O ye Asvins, now with steeds of many a varied hue,
4 Delight yourselves, ye Gods, in plants and waters when Rsis give them and ye find they suit You.
4 We laud this manly power of him the Mighty One, preserver, inoffensive, bounteous and benign;
2 Indra, thou art our own with thy protection, a guardian near to men who love thee truly,
'For entry thee, for rest thee', he says; entry and rest are the metres; verily by the metres he appropriates
Beholding these inferior powers, the hero, well knowing, takes his stand among the cattle.
6. May the waters afford us welfare, may the herbs be propitious to us I Indra's bolt shall beat off the Rakshas, far
animals. Then they say, 'Wild sesame and Gavidhuka grass are not a proper offering'; he offers with
proclaimed me.' So they slay the fish at pleasure, for he is cursed [1]. They found him; they said, 'Come
4 A Warrior thou by strength, wisdom, and wondrous deed, in might excellest all that is.
they created a thousand, the pan being the thousandth; he who knows thus the pan as the thousandth
7 That we may worship, with your Hail to Agni! with sacrificial cakes and fat oblations,
'Let me come to thee'; 'There is no space here', he answered. He said to Viçvakarman, 'Let me come to
9. He who receives thee as a gift, O house, and he by whom thou hast been built, both these, O mistress of
1. As this draught animal, O ye Asvins, comes on, and proceeds, thus may thy soul come on, and proceed to me!
6. Death from hunger, and death from thirst, poverty in cattle, and failure of offspring, all that, O apâmârga, do we
13 O mighty Indra, Gotama's son Nodhas hath fashioned this new prayer to thee Eternal,
7 O Agni who art worshipped well, dear let our princes he to thee,
A hundred iron fortresses confined me but forth I flew with rapid speed a Falcon.
5 ToAgni, the Invoking Priest, offer your best, your lofty speech,
3. Sing praise to him the Lord of light! The Gods have made the God to be their messenger,
5 Armed with resistless weapons, with vast power to cleave, the Vrtra-slayer whets his darts and deals
The drops of Soma juice, those eagles of the heavens, most cheering, rich in meath, rest in the
10 Yea, she most dear amid dear stream, Seven-sistered, graciously inclined,
1. Fly forth from here, O evil mark, vanish from here, fly forth to yonder place! Upon him that hates us do we
9 Thus have I called you to our aid as sages called on you of old:
24 Slay the male demon, Indra! slay the female, joying and triumphing in arts of magic.
farther than the waters have swept and hotter than fire. O Love, You are greater than all.
2 Loose in the wind the woman's robe was streaming what time she won a car-load worth a thousand.
Or those, the Holy, prompt to hear, our helpers, who, carborne, turn their horses hither, Agni--9 With these, borne on one ear, Agni, approach us, or borne on many, for thy steeds are able.
3. To glory goest thou, a Sage with ordering skill, like a groomed steed thou rushest forward to the
8 The fierce God seized that huge and restless coiler, insatiate, drinker of the sweets, recumbent,
soma, the waters, plants, and cows, cause thou four-footed and two-footed creatures to enter here!
The theologians say, 'He indeed would be an Adhvaryu who in making Soma descend should make it
12. Shouting forth, thundering, red, white he carries a great penis along the earth. The Brahmakârin sprinkles
So in the seats wherein ye dwell have we beheld the Golden One,
5. To thy face, O lord of cattle, to thy eyes, O Bhava, to thy skin, to thy form, thy appearance, (and to thy aspect)
m Go, goddess, to the god, to Soma for Indra's sake.
atmosphere; verily he puts down the atmosphere [1]. He makes the horse sniff it; verily he puts breath in
May be by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of Mitra, Varuna, and the Floods.
These are the deities, overlords of these animals; to them he is cut off who puts down the heads of the
powers of grudge come thou hither: thou hast made this kingdom rich in liberal gifts.
Vamadevya. 'The great and powerful one, O Agni', he says. This is the character of the Brhat. In that he
birthplace among the Asuras, and he becomes worse off. (The brick) has three lines on it; that with three
Agni hath come to feed on mortal? fuel. She hath made light and chased away the darkness.
With women there can be no lasting friendship: hearts of hyenas are the hearts of women.
11 On the high places ye have made the grass for man, and water in the valleys, by your skill, O Men.
5 Here are the Kutsas supplicating Indra for might, the Lord of Bays for God-sent conquest.
Soon as they look upon his might his enemies tremble in alarm.
in yonder world the wind blows; three he offers, these worlds are three; verily from these worlds he wins
1. WITH sacrifice I purge both earth and heaven: I burn up great she-fiends who serve not Indra,
Wherewith we may enjoy ourselves, O Victor, with undiminished life and hero children.
sacrifice, for that cause a son is born shamefaced and retiring. One offering only should one make; a
27 Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, unhallowed, tread us to the ground.
appropriates the power and strength of his foe [1]; he overcomes the evil foe. He against whom
2. Thou that makest all men sallow, inflarning them like a searing fire, even now, O takman, thou shalt become
fumigate thee with the Tristubh metre, in the manner of Angiras; may the Adityas fumigate thee with the
1. Drink Soma, Indra Lord of bays! and let it cheer thee: the stone, like a well-guided courser,
Vent to his voice, inciteth men to worshipwith lauds bring Indra hither to our dwellings.
7 Here is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the Home of Gods:
With firm support parted and stayed the Parents, and, sitting, fixed him there erected, mighty.
They propped up heaven and then brought waters with their might, got sacrifice and in a body made it
f Thou art of the dust, all-supporting; Atharvan first pressed out thee, O Agni.
In his swift flight the red Dawns borne by horses refresh their bodies in the home of Order.
20 O Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for thee,
2 He was set down mid men as Priest unerring, Agni, wise, welcome in our holy synods.
thou, woman, shalt love me, so that thou shalt not be averse to me.
6 For, Son of Strength, from thee come many succours, and powers abundant that a God possesses.
b (Thou art) Rohini the Naksatra, Prajapati the deity; Mrgaçirsa the Naksatra, Soma the deity; Ardra the
Vasus, Adityas, Rudras have exalted me, made me far-reaching, inighty, thinker, sovran lord.
him for whom these are put down the dawn breaks; verily he smites away the dark.
p The earth ours, the oblation the gods, the benedictions the sacrificers'; for the divinities of the gods I
1. Indra, this might of thine I praise most highly for the sacrifice
13 O Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in any way with lauds to thee.
Shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors, they raise their voice and chant their psalm as
Arjun was fearless, the Supreme Lord was his charioteer. His outlook was that the Pandavas were legitimately entitled to half the kingdom of Hastinapur, but the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, the Kauravas had not agreed to share. Arjun was ready for battle, eager to get back what was rightfully theirs and punish them for all their past wrongdoings.His request for the chariot to be placed in the middle of the battlefield was to take a closer look at the Kaurava army. Arjun wanted to see all those who had taken the side of injustice. He wanted to punish them equally, as they had chosen to be on the wrong side, none of them would be spared.
3. Through these Thunderer gained strong manly vigour, through whom he waxed in stren gth to
hostility', he says; the earth is connected with the Gayatri, the atmosphere with the Tristubh, the sky with
TIOU with thy might, Vaisvanara Jatavedas, settest the Gods free frodi the curse that bound them.
2 Ye, Indra-Soma, gave her light to Morning, and led the Sun on high with all his splendour.
(Famed) be (the praiser) of thee that art famed, O thou with the bays.
Or, as upraised by priests in invocation, let them assist us in the rush to battle.
20 What by his morning songs Kanva, the powerful, hath, with the Priyamedhas, gained71 The herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, have I, the Rsi, driven away.
'Yonder sun', he should reply, for in it they offer to all the gods [2]. He who knowing thus piles the fire
prosperity. He who desires gain should offer to Savitr a spotted (beast); Savitr is lord of production;
Guide us, O Much-invoked, in this our way may we still live and look upon the light.
5 Come also to our dwelling, Lords of ample wealth, common partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon,
1. THIS very mighty one whom Gods commission, the Conqueror of cars, ever triumphant,
a (He I offers) to Indra and Agni on twelve potsherds, an oblation to the All-gods, a cake on twelve
1. O thou with stones for arms, thy powers, rending the fiends, have raised themselves:
syllables won the thirteenfold Stoma; the Rudras with fourteen syllables won the fourteenfold Stoma;
This day shall he approach the Gods, most welcome: then he declares good gifts to him who offers.
I hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, Indra and Agni, and the Pair of Asvins.
'On the instigation of god Savitr (with these words) he takes up the pressing-stone, for instigation, 'with
27 Like a son cherished in his father's houi§e, let our oblation rise unto the Gods.
5 Apparent are his lines as he approaches the course is single, but the cars are many,
7 That man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in the fight,
7. To the assembly's wondrous Lord, the lovely friend of Indra, I
e Be prosperity ours from our friendship with the gods. May we be not severed from our service of the
11 Hero, may we, with thee for Friend, withstand the man who pants against us in his wrath,
Dwelling in wood, like Varuna, a river, lavishing treasure, he distributes blessings.
7 Like two hands give ye us increasing vigour; like heaven and earth constrain the airy regions.
marked, be is distinguished from his evil foe, they doubt not of him for common meal or wedding. On a
6 And may the Mountains famed in noble eulogies, and the fair-gleaming Rivers keep us safe from
Winning us land and waters, flow thou hitherward: Rainer of bounties, Soma, make broad way for us.
Sung to thee, Sage, the charming words of wisdom, to thee, O Singer, with. my thoughts and Praises.
2 She with her might, like one who digs for lotus-stems, hath burst with her strong waves the ridges of
9. Pressers, blend Soma juice for him, each draught most excellent, for him
offers with (the vessel) for Vayu; therefore [2] (a man) is a slayer of a Brahman (through slaying) an
9 I call that brilliant band of yours, adorable, rapid on the car
elbow of the Samidhenis, puts his enemy in his elbow. He joins the half-verses; this is the elbow of the
May Indra slay each best of you when Agni's flame hath struck you down!
Agni gives wealth and valour to the worshipper, to man who offers up his gifts.
9 Asvins, your Soma sheds delicious sweetness: drink ye thereof and come unto our dwelling.
23 Like two slight images of girls, unrobed, upon a new-wrought post,
Further Paijavana's desire with favour. Guard faithfully his lasting firm dominion.
verily he confers on him expiration and inspiration. 'The rain from the sky, the winds saved, the twentyonefold Stoma', he says; the twenty-onefold is support, (verily it serves) for support. 'Thou art the
2 With these discomfit hosts that fight against us, and check the opponent's wrath, thyself uninjured.
2. Carefully tending Law with law they have attained their vigorous might:
He with his seed spreads forth beyond another's seed, whomever Brahmanaspati takes for his friend.
layer and then to sprinkle, lie would make it swell on both sides. He cuts it off and sprinkles it; there are
2 The Son left not his portion to the brother, he made a home to hold him who should gain, it.
thee; thou art Soma; be ready for the Açvins, be ready for Sarasvati, be ready for Indra, the good
Busied with sacred rites he mounts and he descends. He hath laid down his vital germ within these
the grains of dust which the blood in its fall seizes upon', (they replied). Therefore one should not revile
6 O Indra, with thy right hand bring, and with thy left remember us.
g Of thee, O god Soma, who hast the Vasus for thy troop, who knowest the mind, who belongest to the
7 He who this day for Indra presses Soma, prepares the brew and fries the grains of barleyLoving the hymns of that devoted servant, to him may Indra give heroic vigour.
the sacrifice. (He measures) five times in silence [5]. They make up ten. The Viraj has ten syllables, the
2 Laid in the bowl, pure-flowing on to Vayu and the Asvins, may
say, 'One should pile it up.' It is as if one awakens a richer man with his due portion. Manu piled the fire;
Like ever-conquering chariots that display their strength, gain wealth and give unfailing help.
9 Urged on thou sendest out thy voice, O Pavamana; thou hast moved,
5 When with a roar that fills the woods, thou forcest down on wind's head the stores which 8usga kept
3 Earth at their racings trembles as if weak and worn, when on their ways they yoke their cars for
Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
when they dig in it they knock up against the brick, against gravel. Now all this (earth) in the eyes of the
We dare not stint the sacred food of Mitra and Varuna upon the back of Agni.
Flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager for the kine. O Soma!
Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced.
May Soma grant us riches sought with longing, mighty, exceeding strong, with store of heroes.
6 Agni is Lord of Amrta. in abundance, Lord of the gift of wealth and hero valour,
8. With this may we obtain strength god-appointed, happy with brave sons through a hundred winters!
With kisses they caress the Grandson of the Red, like the swift ray of light, the Household Priest of
Even the Gods who sit upon the sacred grass of Nahusa's son Yayati, bless and comfort us.
1. KINDLED, bring, Agni, Gods to-day for him who lifts the ladle up.
20 What time the Swift One resteth in the golden place of sacrifice,
eye of the sacrifice; therefore the Somas follow the Ukthya when offered; therefore the body follows the
8 Thou hast struck down in death Karanja, Parnaya, in Atithigva's very glorious going forth.
This fire, O Maruts, hath been duly kindled; let it find favour with you, youthful Sages.
Maruts, Varuna with the Adityas. Indra had recourse to Prajapati; he made him [5] sacrifice with the
2 Stream to thine embassy for us: thou hastenest, for Indra, to
May Visnu, of long strides, who is our preserver, be propitious to us.
to gather with the skin of tame animals he would afflict with pain tame animals; he gathers with a black
connected with Prajapati; verily he piles the fire with Prajapati. The first brick that is put down obstructs
sacrificer is imperfect, and if one who is not a Soma sacrificer offers the Samnayya he is a thief and does
2 His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden: unsated with his tongue he eats the fuel.
8 Blest evermore be all the men who come from us, who magnify
1. AGNI, erect, hath shown enriching favour: the flame goes forward to the Gods' assembly.
17 When the sharp-pointed arrow, O thou Hero, flieth mid any conflict of the people,
Hath told these deeds of might as thou hast wrought them, great acts, spontaneous, and to man's
5. Within these (directions) I assign thee to old age; forth to a distance shall go Nirriti and disease! Thus from
Bound with a triple bond the Steer roars loudly: the mighty God hath entered in to mortals.
6 In whom all goodly treasures meet together, even as steeds and riders for the booty.
10 Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Forests, and let the Immolator, Agni, dress it.
6 With homage have we sought thee as a Hero, strong, preeminent, with unfailing wealth.
Thou in the Adityas' keeping movest restlessly. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
verily he ascends the atmosphere. He approaches the Sadas; verily he makes him go to the world of
Arya and Dasa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the Conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped.
I WHATEVER law of thine, O God, O Varurna, as we are men,
10 Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, that, Indra, is thy manly strength.
4 The bull in joy had drunk a lake of water. His shattering horn encountered an opponent.
offspring; he obtains offspring [3]. The plants are the waters, man is what is not; verily the waters give
14 Aditi also hath brought forth a hymn for Indra, Sovran Lord:
windless by his own power. Apart from God, there was nothing whatsoever.
Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with wealth. We crave to-day this gracious favour of the
3. Never was any hero born before thee mightier than thou:
In the wild joy of Soma had struck off with might the head of Vrtra, tyrant of the earth and heaven.
tear the sacrificer asunder; the fire should therefore be thus, or he should make it by friction, so that the
f Thou art the portion of the Vasus [1], the overlordship of the Rudras, the quadruped saved, the twentyfourfold Stoma.
6 Unbounded is your greatness, ye of mighty power: may your bright vigour be our aid, Evayamarut;
Shree Krishna’s words had the desired effect on Arjun. Looking at the armies on both sides of the battlefield, his heart sank, they were all “Kurus” his relatives. The brave warrior who wanted to punish the Kauravas for all their wickedness a few minutes back suddenly became fearful. Comprehending the devastation this war would cause, his valor started to diminish. Hence, Sanjay has called him Kaunteyah the son of Kunti, denoting that Arjun had become softhearted, similar to his mother. However, Arjun was now very confused and his mind filled with questions.
another, and with them all equally prospered. Those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of thirty-three
4.6.9 Sukta 9 – Charm to secure the love of a Woman
crushed the Yajus, it crushed the Saman; the Rc raised it; in that the Rc raised (it), hence the elevating
Thou, very gracious God, bast thousand medicines: inflict no evil on our sons or progeny.
10 Sharers of household sacrifice, come, Maruts, stay not far away,
people fall into confusion', he should interchange the animals; verily he causes the people to fall into
28. He that has listened to the stanzas, yet has permitted her to herd among the cattle, his life and prosperity the
world of heaven. The Rsis came to the place of sacrifice; they [2] saw the sacrificial cake creeping
20. The half-months and months, the divisions of the year together with the seasons, the resounding waters,
1. An eagle found thee out, a boar dug thee out with his snout. Seek thou, O plant, to injure him that seeks to
Stoma, and it forming the path of the fifteenfold (Stoma); the eighteen-month-old calf the strength; the
1. Born by night art thou, O plant, dark, black, sable. Do thou, that art rich in colour, stain this leprosy, and the
2 O Vayu, thou and Indra are meet drinkers of these Soma-draughts,
4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of the kine,
Swa-dharma is one’s duty as an individual, in accordance with the Vedas. There are two kinds of swa-dharmas, or prescribed duties for the individual—para dharma, or spiritual duties, and apara dharma, or material duties. Considering oneself to be the soul, the prescribed duty is to love and serve God with devotion. This is called para dharma. However, since a vast majority of humankind does not possess this spiritual perspective, the Vedas also prescribe duties for those who see themselves as the body. These duties are defined according to one’s āśhram (station in life), and varṇa (occupation). They are called apara dharma, or mundane duties. This distinction between spiritual duties and material duties needs to be kept in mind while understanding the Bhagavad Gita and the Vedic philosophy at large.By occupation, Arjun was a warrior, and so his occupational duty as a warrior was to fight for the protection of righteousness. Shree Krishna is calling this swa-dharma, or prescribed duty at the bodily level.
Let not the Dragon of the Deep annoy us, and gladly may he welcome our addresses.
2.6.9.2 Mantra 2: The Praise of the Sacrificer with the Dvadaçaha
Each one solicits him for wealth and seeks renown to prosper him.
5 Penetrate with an awl, O Sage, the hearts of avaricious churls,
Aditi, and all ye gods, that he may attain to old age!
As he who with oblation comes calls him aloud in every place.
11 I hear that thou wast born sole Lord of heroes of the Five Races, famed among the people.
12 From Indra have I measured out a song eight-footed with nine parts,
He stirs the wearied man to pleasure and great joy what time the longing gifts approach him as he
5. May bright Sarasvati, endowed with plenteous wealth and spoil, enriched
3. Thy vital force that has been dissipated afar, thy in-breathing and thy out-breathing, shall come back again!
May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee! Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings!
form of food; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who desires power should offer a ruddy (beast) to
May she, the Gladdener, yielding food and vigour, the Milch-cow Vak, approach us meetly lauded.
The wakening song sung forth in holy synod: that which is born for thee, O Indra, notice.
Indra and Vayu first. They slew him; he became putrid; the gods could not endure him, they said to
1. The Soma drops, exceeding rich in sweets, to Indra have been poured,
possessed of a (sure) foundation. The hymn called the Ajya (Çastra), that is the foundation of the cups;
over this. He who piles the fire without keeping it in the pan for a year-(it is with him) as when an
7 On him shall no fierce anger fall, no sore distress shall visit him,
Wherewith thou holpest Bhrgu and the Yatis and Praskanva when the prize was staked.
14 So Agni, rich in many friends, with fiery splendour, seat thyself
Çitra desirous of cattle is propagated with offspring, with cattle, with pairings. With the offering to Agni
2. Indra and Agni! ye shook down, together, with one mightyr deed, The ninety forts which Dasas held.
3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own mass, as from the cloud spreads Surya;
Full in the midst of heaven the Priest is seated: sirew we the sacred grass where Gods may rest them.
radiance, with the hymns, with the Stomas, with the metres, for the increase of wealth, for pro-eminence
do not resort to him to whom wisdom does not resort. He puts Dhatr first; verily in his mouth he places
bridles removed. It is the Unnetr who offers; the Adhvaryu when he has uttered 'Godspeed!' is as one
pays reverence by night, he overcomes the darkness by light. 'Should reverence be paid to the fire or
12 With Rtu, through the house-fire, thou, kind Giver, guidest sacrifice:
leading to the gods; sit in the world of the righteous.
In the light-winning war, Indra, in rapturous joy, thou smotest Vrtra dead and broughtest floods of rain.
5 From inmost reservoir in countless channels flow down these rivers which the foe beholds not.
to his increase. Having performed the oblation to the Vrtra slayer, he took his bolt and again went
beast) with a spot on the forehead and horns bent forward to Indra, the overcomer of enemies [4]; the
Gladly accept our friendship and obedience: let us not go from thee to distant countries.
subject his equals to him; he becomes possessed of a village. It is (the offering) for taking possession;
12 Men, singers worship Savitar the God with hymn and holy rites,
15 O Surya, make our fame to be most excellent among the Gods,
8 Adorned with their array of gold and jewels, they o'er the earth a covering veil extended.
also that is as when one makes preparation for a man about to go to (another) people [5]. (The offering)
5. Where your gold and silver swings are, where cymbals and lutes chime together, thither do ye, O Apsaras,
3 Stretch out those hands of thine, extend to us-ward thy wide capacious arms, and grant us glory.
None cometh near, O Indra, to thy thunderbolt, when with swift steeds thou fliest over many a league.
1. This yearning love comes from the Apsaras, the victorious, imbued with victory. Ye gods, send forth the
In the last two verses, Shree Krishna promised knowledge and then qualified it with eight merits. It is mentioned here as “this dharma,” or the path of loving devotion to God.No matter how wonderful the knowledge and how effective the path, it remains useless to one who refuses to walk on it. As explained in the previous verse, direct perception of God comes later; initially, a leap of faith is required to begin the process. The Bhakti Rasāmṛit Sindhu (1.4.15) states: ādau śhraddhā tataḥ sādhusaṅgo ’tha bhajanakriyā “The first step in the path to God-realization is to have faith. Then one begins participating in satsaṅg (spiritual programs). This leads to the personal practice of devotion.”Often people say that they are only willing to believe in what they can directly perceive, and since there is no immediate perception of God, they do not believe in Him. However, the fact is that we believe in so many things in the world too, without direct perception of them. A judge delivers judgment upon a case concerning an event that took place many years in the past. If the judge adopted the philosophy of believing only what he or she had directly experienced, then the entire legal system would fail. A President administers a country on the basis of reports from all over the country. It is impossible for him to visit and see all the villages and cities within his domain. Now, if he was not willing to believe these reports, on the grounds that he had no direct perception of what was happening, how would he be able to administer the whole country? So, even in material activities, faith is required at every step. The Bible states this very nicely: “We walk by faith, and not by sight.” (2 Corinthians 5:7)There is a beautiful story regarding perception of God. A king once accosted a sadhu with the statement, “I do not believe in God because I cannot see Him.” The sadhu asked for a cow to be brought to king’s court. The king obliged and ordered his servants to bring a cow. The sadhu then requested that it be milked. The king again instructed his servants to do as the sadhu wanted. The sadhu asked, “O King! Do you believe that this milk, freshly taken out from the cow, contains butter?” The king said he had full faith that it did. The sadhu said, “You cannot see the butter in the milk. Then why do you believe it is there?” The king replied, “We cannot see it at present because the butter is pervading the milk, but there is a process for seeing it. If we convert the milk into yogurt, and then churn the yogurt, the butter will become visible.” The sadhu said, “Like the butter in the milk, God is everywhere. If we cannot immediately perceive Him, we should not jump to the conclusion that there is no God. There is a process for perceiving Him; if we are willing to have faith and follow the process, we will then get direct perception of God and become God-realized.”Belief in God is not a natural process that we as human beings just follow. We have to exercise our free will and actively make a decision to have faith in God. In the assembly of the Kauravas, when Dushasan endeavored to disrobe Draupadi, Lord Krishna saved her from shame and embarrassment by lengthening her sari. All the Kauravas present saw this miracle, but refused to have faith in the omnipotence of Shree Krishna and come to their senses. The Supreme Lord says in this verse that those who choose not to have faith in the spiritual path remain bereft of divine wisdom and continue rotating in the cycle of life and death.
Strong, Mighty God, dwell with me now and ever: Lord of Bay Horses, do not thou desert us.
5 Thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession, treasures made manifest and treasures hidden.
Fain would we reach the dwelling of the vigorous Steer who loves the kine, O Asvins: this is our desire.
O Mitra-Varuna whomsoe'er ye: favour, here, to him the rain with sweetness streameth down from
May he enrich us for our prayers and praises: now can the cow be milked; the path is open.
Asuras away from these worlds. The observance of the Upasads is for the driving away of foes. One
them indeed he puts down in the fire, in that he puts down the heads of the animals. 'I appoint for thee
5 Strong with the Rudras as with his own children, in manly battle conquering his foemen '
assuredly enjoys Prajapati. An unlimited amount should be poured out, Prajapati is unlimited; (verily it
8. Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to slaughter Vritra who compassed and stayed the
All this may all the Gods banish and drive away: let not the winding worm touch me and wound my foot.
4 To him shall Agni Bharata give shelter: long shall he look upon the Sun up-rising,
17 Ensign of Gods hast thou become, O Agni, joy-giver, knower of all secret wisdom.
2. Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra whom we must adore,
3 Pour on the sieve the Soma, ne'er subdued in waters, waterless,
he born small becomes great [2]; 'most extensive, impetuous, winning food', he says; verily he makes
head divided. 'Thou art the string of Visnu; thou art the fixed point of Visnu', he says, for the oblationholder is connected with Visnu as its deity. Now the knot which he first ties, if he were not to unloose it,
3. If thou hast deceived or cursed a woman or a man in thy folly, both release and deliverance with my voice do I
3. Yea, those bay steeds he harnessed to the chariot that the Sun might come:
foe in sacrificing gains the power and strength of him who sacrifices not; when his foe is sacrificing he
Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and aims at us. The Goddess mother brought thee
(that which is called) prakrî, the (Songs called) ukthya, are woven and deposited in the ukkhishta; (also the parts)
4 Whoso hath honoured him with offerings rich in oil, him Brahmanaspati leads forward on his way,
5 Drawing the gold-yoked car his Bays, white-footed, have manifested light to all the peoples.
On a place of sacrifice where the sacrifice faces the east should he make him to sacrifice for whom he
Anger, greed, lust, etc. are considered in the Vedic scriptures as mānas rog, or diseases of the mind. The Ramayan states: mānas roga kachhuka maiṅ gāe hahiṅ saba keṅ lakhi biralenha pāe [v53] We are all aware of the diseases of the body—even a single bodily ailment has the power to make one’s whole day miserable—but we do not realize that we are being continuously tormented by multiple mental ailments. And since we do not recognize lust, anger, greed, etc. as mental diseases, we do not try to cure them. Psychology is a branch of human knowledge that attempts to analyze these ailments and propose solutions to them. However, both the analysis and the solution presented by western psychology leave much to be desired, and appear to be gross approximations of the reality of the mind.In this and the subsequent verse, Shree Krishna has given perfect and penetrating insight into functioning of the mind. He explains that when we repeatedly contemplate that there is happiness in some object, the mind becomes attached to it. For example, in a class there are a number of boys and girls, and they interact innocuously with each other. One day one boy notices something about one girl and starts thinking, “I would be very happy if she were mine.” As he continuously repeats this thought in his mind, his mind becomes attached to her. He tells his friends that he is madly in love with her, and he is unable to study because his mind repeatedly goes to her. His friends ridicule him that they all interact with her in class, but none of them is crazy about her. Why is he losing his sleep and ruining his studies because of her? The fact is that he repeatedly thought that there was happiness in the girl, and so his mind became attached to her.Now attachment seems quite innocuous by itself. But the problem is that from attachment comes desire. If one is attached to drinks, the desire for drinks comes repeatedly to the mind. If one is attached to cigarettes, then thoughts of the pleasure of smoking cigarettes repeatedly flow in the mind, creating a craving for them. In this way, attachment leads to desire.Once desire develops, it gives birth to two more problems—greed and anger. Greed comes from the fulfillment of desire. Jimi pratilābha lobha adhikāī (Ramayan) [v54] “If you satisfy desire, it leads to greed.” Thus desire is never eliminated by satiating it:yat pṛithivyāṁ vrīhi-yavaṁ hiraṇyaṁ paśhavaḥ striyaḥna duhyanti manaḥ-prītiṁ puṁsaḥ kāma-hatasya te (Bhāgavatam 9.19.13) [v55]“If one person were to get all the wealth, luxuries, and sensual objects in the world, that person’s desire would still not be satiated. Hence, knowing it to be the cause of misery, an intelligent person should renounce desire.”On the flip side what happens if the fulfillment of desire is obstructed? It gives rise to anger. Bear in mind that anger does not arise by itself. It is created from the obstruction of desire; and desire arises from attachment, while attachment comes from contemplation of the sense objects. In this manner, we see how the simple act of contemplating the pleasures of sense objects leads downward to the twin diseases of greed and anger. In the next verse Shree Krishna continues the chain further down, and explains the consequences of anger.
verily he calms the pain of the whole extent of the fire. (He draws) with (verses) containing (the word)
Strong Rudra with the Marut host, Indra, Agni let us call for weal beyond our foes.
Surya remove my heart's disease, take from me this my yellow hue.
one above the other is larger, for so as it were are these worlds; (verily they serve) for prosperity; he cuts
6 The Vrtra-slaver with his bolt felled Vrtra: the magic of the godless, waxen mighty,
2 Great in tby power and wisdom, Strong, with thought that comprehendeth all
5 O Indra Maghavan, by thee protected may we be thine, princes and priests and singers,
And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power.
9 Visnu the lofty ruling Power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise:
5 Forth from mid air with light he dravc the darkness, as the gale blows a lily from the fiver.
breaths in the sacrificer. Again the Viraj is of ten syllables; the Viraj is food; verily he finds support in
Like a car harnessed for some great achievement, Indra must be the cause of our rejoicing.
2 For they are Kings of noblest might, of glorious fame most widely spread;
verily also he makes ready it (the rjisa). When the Soma was being borne away, the Gandharva
11. To the seven Rishis now do we speak, to the divine waters and Pragâpati. To the Fathers with Yama at their
11 And now, O Indra, strengthen us: come near and aid us in the fight,
The illusion of death is created because we identify ourselves with the body. The Ramayan explains this as follows:jauṅ sapaneṅ sira kāṭai koī, binu jāgeṅ na dūri dukh hoī. [v23]“If we dream of our head getting cut, we will perceive its pain until we wake up.” The incident in the dream is an illusion, but the experience of the pain continues to torment until we wake up and dispel the illusion. Similarly, in the illusion that we are the body, we fear the experience of death. For the enlightened soul whose illusion has been dispelled, this fear of death vanishes.One may ask that if nobody can kill anyone, then why is murder considered a punishable offense? The answer is that the body is the vehicle of the soul, and destroying any living being’s vehicle is violence, which is forbidden. The Vedas clearly instruct: mā hinsyāt sarvabhūtāni [v24] “Do not commit violence toward anyone.” In fact, the Vedas even consider killing of animals as a crime. However, there are occasions where the rules change and even violence becomes necessary. For example, in cases where a snake is approaching to bite, or if one is attacked with lethal weapons, or one’s life sustenance is being snatched away, then violence is permitted for self-protection. In the present situation, what is appropriate for Arjun, violence or non-violence, and why? Shree Krishna will explain this to him in great detail, as the dialogue of the Bhagavad Gita progresses. And in the course of the explanation, priceless divine knowledge will be revealed to shed light on the subject.
7 For glory, Agni, day by day, thou liftest up the mortal man to highest immortality,
1. ON a high car, O Parvata and Indra, bring pleasant viands, with brave heroes, hither.
2. The arrow, winged with longing, barbed with love, whose shaft is undeviating desire, with that, well-aimed,
Drive ye away the dog, my friends, drive ye the long-tongued dog away!
16 In thee be juicy nutriments united, and powers and mighty foe-subduing vigour,
21 Day after day far from their seat he drove them, alike, from place to place, those darksome
conquers cattle, has the thunderbolt in his arm, overcomes the host arrayed (against him), crushing it with might!
drinker of the waters who is offered in sacrifice. 'O ye divine waters, make it palatable, a very palatable
Here are the Maruts, all, thy dear companions: prayers have increased thy power and might, O Indra.
smites away the Raksases from the whole extent of the sacrifice; he pours butter transversely; therefore
How is it to be understood that performing the same actions some people are bound to material existence and others are released from material bondage? Shree Krishna gives the answer in this verse. Those who are unattached and unmotivated by material rewards are never bound by karma. But those craving reward and obsessed with the desire to enjoy material pleasures become entangled in the reactions of work.The word yukt means “united in consciousness with God.” It can also mean “not wanting any reward other than purification of the heart.” Persons who are yukt relinquish desire for the rewards of their actions, and instead engage in works for the purpose of self-purification. Therefore, they soon attain divine consciousness and eternal beatitude.On the other hand, ayukt means “not united with God in consciousness.” It can also denote “desiring mundane rewards not beneficial to the soul.” Such persons, incited by cravings, lustfully desire the rewards of actions. The reactions of work performed in this consciousness bind these ayukt persons to the samsara or the cycle of life and death.
5 Night and Dawn, changing each the other's colour, meeting together suckle one same Infant:
7 Now have both worlds been praised by the Vasisthas, and holy Mitra, Varuna, and Agni.
10 Let these men, heroes in the fight with foemen, prevail against all godless arts of 4magic,These who ipprove the noble song I sing thee.
pressing against (us), do not, O earth, that liest close to everything, there injure us!
5 When Gods anoint thee Priest at their oblation, and seat thee for thy task as Sacrificer,
exhausted, it cannot be used again', they say. 'O Agni, yoke thy (steeds)', 'Yoke them that best invoke the
He, the Avenger, seeketh this man's offered gifts: this God, the source of riches, doth not flee from sin.
9 Let the ascending drops attain to thee, the Wondrous God, in heaven:
7. Well-weaponed Soma, pour to us a stream of riches doubly great;
15 Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food in heaven,
7. Indra, having been wounded, first created this vigour, and this ever fresh divine food: that same belongs to
With fruitful invocation may we call on you, Gods, who give ear to us for grace, for happiness.
I laud you in the solemn synods, Visnu: pour ye food on us in our camps, O Indra.
4 Germ of the world, the Deities' vital spirit, this God moves ever as his will inclines him.
And Gods bring to this rite which gives the five-fold gift the Hero, lover of mankind.
on twelve potsherds to Vaiçvanara; Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; verily having obtained the year
3. The brazen-beaked (birds of prey), those with beaks pointed as a needle, and those, too, with thorny beaks,
4. Every moving thing I have held fast. Eye and breath I have held fast. I have held fast all limbs in the deep
Usas, the Daughter of the Sky, the opulent, shines foes and enmities away.
1 SPEAK forth three words, the words which light precedeth, which milk this udder that produceth
1. OFFER oblations in his mouth, the bounteous God's whom we must serve.
verily winning the strength of the quarters, he piles the fire in the strength of the quarters; he should take
he pours a libation on either side of the omentum; verily he delights both (sets of gods).
Like a black cloud that sank into the water. Heroes, I send you forth. Go, fight in battle.
8 Asvins, to you are brought abundant viands in rivalry with sacred songs, unceasing.
Quaff them and satisfy therewith thy longing; then fix thy mind upon bestowing treasure.
2 By paths that are thine own come hither, Agni, joyous, delighting in the Gods' alliance,
2 Giving fresh life when she hath hid the darkness, this Dawn hath wakened there with new-born lustre.
Which the Five Tribes have over them, whereby we may win opulence.
10 Come, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, dwellers in light, primeval, God-adorers,
How, and what love hath he for those who love him, who have entwined in him their firm affection?
7 Decking the beauty of their forms in secret the Swans with purple backs have flown down hither.
what is imperfect is made perfect by mind. He sprinkles across so as not to make a failure. Speech and
Those which our father Manu hath selected, I crave from. Rudra for our gain and welfare.
with the Tristubh [1]; verily thereby he obtains the midday pressing. (He presses) twelve times on the
2 The drop of Soma, pressed by wise Nahusyas, becomes the banquet of the Heavenly PeopleIndu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal, with the sheep and cows and waters.
Fair-helmeted, o'ercoming with the mighty, and lending us the strength of bulls, O Indra.
verily by Prajapati he takes his eating of food. 'Here do I take the eating of food of N. N., descendant of
2. With (the charm) that was found of yore by the Brahmans, found by the Rishis, and found by the gods, with (the
11 Then at thy roar the very birds are terrified, when, eating-up the grass, thy sparks fly forth abroad.
18 Aryaman, Aditi deserve our worship: the laws of Varuna remain unbroken.
26. Do not, O Rudra, contaminate us with fever, or with poison, or with heavenly fire: cause this lightning to
The highest might to-day is yours, the Vasits': come ye, as many as ye are, one-minded.
and yet He resides in even the tiniest drop of water.
him Prajapati found; the horse is connected with Prajapati, with the horse he collects (it), for the finding
Come with thy team-drawn car, O Vayu, to the gift, come to the sacrificer's gift.
2 With Soma go ye nigh to him chief drinker of the Soma's juice:
4 To Indra and to Vayu dear, this Soma, by the mortar pressed,
luck, riches, restrainer, supporter, peace, firmness, all [1], greatness, discovery, knowledge, begetting,
3 Seven regions have their several Suns; the ministering priests are seven;
5. The man who lies in wait and fights against us, deeming himself a giant or a hero,-By battle or with strength destroy him, Indra! With thy help, manly-souled! may we be victors!
2. He, milking for dear meath the heavenly udder, hath sat in the ancient gathering-place.
1. YE Twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, clothed be your clouds in robes of oil and
11 For these, the Earth and Heaven with their abundant seed, four-bodied Narasmsa, Yama, Aditi,
4 'Tis he whom Trita must refine, 'tis he who shall make Indra glad:
1. As the sun (goes around) the heavens I have surrounded the race of the serpents. As night (puts to rest) all
corner near the fire is of the same height as the sacrificer; in that he anoints the corner near the fire, he
As from a mountain fiow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts who feedeth many a one.
all his days; he does not die before his time; be becomes rich in cattle; he obtains offspring. The
Svasti, he offers to Agni and Soma. Agni and Soma indeed are the eyes of the sacrificer; verily he sees
desires offspring should offer an oblation to Soma and Rudra; Soma is the bestower of seed, Agni is the
3 Who lurks about the path we take, the robber with a guileful heart:
wins power. There is an Agnistoma, with the Trivrt (Stoma), and verses addressed to the All-gods;
gods made it firm (adrnhan) with the Dhruva; that is why the Dhruva has its name; in that the Dhruva is
The people of the Maruts, I call down to-day even from the luminous realm of heaven.
n Do thou with good labour elaborate this offering for the gods.
6 O Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the sheep's long wool,
Come, thou most mighty Vritra-slayer, meet for praise, come to, libations and to hymns!
He slays in unabated vigour with great might, whomever Brahmanaspati takes for his friend.
3 The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream of the creative juice
7 His piles, assuming every form, are scattered where flow sweet waters, at the spring of fatness;
Sattra where there is no Chandoma; in that there are Chandomas, there is the Sattra. The gods they win
the day, by the Upasads (performed) in the evening (they drove away the Asuras) from the night. In that
The priest calls out, the sacrificer shows his skill, the Asura tries his strength, and with the hymn is
Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, O Thunderer, with wondrous aids!
k O lord of mind, place this sacrifice, O god, for us among the gods, hail! or speech, hail! or the wind,
Burn up the foolish ones, raw flesh devourers: let none of them escape thine heavenly arrow!
9 They who are free from death, fain for him, purified three splendours of the mighty Agni, circling all.
4 These holy prayers, O Indra, have I sung thee: grant to the men the strength of men, thou Hero.
Long be his life who worships, thee, O Indu. May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
beyond other animals, for by it they gather food and light. He gathers with the ass; therefore the ass,
18 The Priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours that are yours,
the earth', (with these words) he offers in a Boerhavia procumbens; this of plants is that which wins rain,
7 How to great Pusan who promotes our welfare,- to honoured Rudra what, who gives oblations?
sacrifice he continues it. There is an oblation for Sarasvati, and (an offering) on twelve potsherds for
Fire-offering thence is yours, O Asvins, Heroes: your car-wheels speed to us like springs of honey.
indeed is the form of cattle; verily by the form he obtains cattle for him; verily he becomes rich in cattle.
May Maghavan, loud-voiced and wielding thunder, stand by us at this sacrifice, in combat.
of heaven; declare this Brahmana to them; when they go to the, world of heaven they will give thee their
8. Fear not, thou shalt not die: I shall cause thee to live unto old age! I have charmed away from thy limbs the
Trita, Rbhuksan, Savitar shall joy in us, and ihe Floods' swift Child in our worship and our prayer.
With all thy powers, O Sakra, all thine helps, O Indra, shake them down:
all', 'Seven bays in thy chariot', 'The radiant countenance of the gods hath arisen', (with these words) he
Thou shinest to the Gods, I set the pressstones. I toil; be joyful in thyself, O Agni.
k Homage to the maker of health, and to the maker of delight.
11 Here, Self-strong Maruts, yea, even here. ye Sages with your sunbright skins
[3] should look (on the offerings); Prajapati is here in the vessels, Prajapati is the sacrifice; verily he
10 Whose well-wrought worship thou acceptest, Agni, thou God a mortal's gift, thou liberal Giver,Dear be his sacrifice to thee, Most Youthful! and may we strengthen him when he adores thee.
Father of Agni, Surya's generator, the Father who begat Indra and Visnu.
10 Come to our home resolved to slay the Dasyu: Kutsa longed eagerly to win thy friendship.
r Thou art the portion of Prajapati, full of strength and milk.
surrounds the sacrifice with a blessing. 'Thou art mind derived from Prajapati [5], with mind and true
7 O Agni, to our heroes bring such riches, thou victorious God.
May the refulgent Agni banish far away let not the winding worm touch me and wound my foot.
4. Bring us the wealth for which we long, O Indra, that which is concealed
3. We, seeking glory, have invoked this God of yours, the Lord of wealth,
n Let Pusan tie a knot for thee, that knot shall mount me.
Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not off our friendship, come and set me free.
4 As thou, O Satakratu, thou, O Indrv, shakest all things down
1. HEAR thou my call, O Indra; be not heedless: thine may we be for thee to give us treasures;
10 Whether as wanderers from the way or speeders on or to the path,
f Weave ye without a flaw the work of the singers;
what has been, if on the embers, what is to be; he heats it on the embers; verily he wins what is to be, for
splendour; in that there is (an offering) on nine potsherds, he bestows brilliance upon him with the Trivrt
Agnidh's altar is as it were the atmosphere; on the Agnidh's altar [4] he puts down a stone, for reality;
10 Gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the King who gives me spotted kine,
8. Thou art the body-protecting parna, a 'liero, brother of me, the hero. Along with the brilliancy of the year do I
16 Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers' duties, desiring riches, yearning after treasure,
altar) with five (verses); the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he goes to the world of heaven with the full
Who, as his praise was sung of old, the Dancer, is the Lord of men.
10 So, Lord of affluent gifts, this juice hath been pressed for thee with strength
1. COME, radiant Asvins, with your noble horses: accept your servant's hymns, ye Wonder-Workers:
Which She of Wondrous Wealth was born to harness,-this car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth.
of the sacrifice, the Vasairivaris are the sacrifice; bringing the bowls of the Hotr and the Maitravaruna
12. From the sin of the gods, and that of the fathers, from mentions of (thy) name, from (evil schemes) concocted
be exhausted; if he were not to utter the Vasat cry, the Raksases would destroy the sacrifice; Vat he says;
they were growing worn out; Kasarnira Kadraveya beheld this Mantra; then did they strike off their
dawn shines upon him, he strikes away the darkness, the evil.
14 Served by the seven priests, he shone forth from ancient time, when in his Mother's bosom, in her
13 Upon this five-spoked wheel revolving ever all living creatures rest and are dependent.
Thou who with high deep-reaching spear hast broken, hast covered over mischief and destroyed it.
5. Agni Vaisvanara, born in course of Order, the messenger of earth, the head of heaven,
Coloured like gold he rests in seats where Mitra dwells, the Steer made beautiful by rivers and by
1 The sacrifice of the lord of the sacrifice is undisturbed.
seeking (us out), we shall sing his praises, and prepare (our) ransom. May our two-footed and four-footed
Sharpen our wits, O Parvata and Indra. May all the Gods vouchsafe to us this favour.
For thee the Soma is poured forth, thy portioned share mid. Gods and men.
Him may the Sovran Varuna deliver, wise, ne'er deccived, loosen the bonds that bind him.
6 What wound soe'er the dark bird hath inflicted, the emmet, or the serpent, or the jackal,
Maruts with holy song, and, Goddess Aditi, Mighty One, to our house and home.
Give us, O Mitra-Varuna, a dwelling safe from attack, which ye shall guard, Boon-Givers!
c May I not brush the place of the cattle, I brush thee that art strong and overcomest foes.
22 Under thy guidance, Indra, mid thy praises, Lord of Thunder, shall
3 Now he is sterile, now begetteth offspring, even as he willeth doth he change his figure.
4 I made to flow the moisture-shedding waters, and set the heaven firm in the scat of Order.
Thou art the messenger of Gods and mortals, and goest glorious with thy light between them.
22. Success, attainment, accomplishment, control, greatness, prosperity, supreme attainment, and wellbeing rest
The sacrifice of him who knows thus does not spill. He collects the weapons of the sacrifice; the
Thou, Indra, with thy friend who makes the foe bow down, slewest from far away the guileful Namuci.
3 To whomsoever, bringer of oblations, they immortal guardians, have given plenteous wealth,
1. Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra's seasonable share.
Naraçansa [2], who art drunk by the fathers, who hast sweetness, and who art invited, I invited eat.
2.2.6.8 Mantra 8: The Eating of the Ida and the Praçitra
3. Thy lofty spirit famed in all the regions as appeasable,-With this thou rendest even things firm, Stone-darter! so to win thee strength.
May we find paths all fair and good to travel. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
10. Strong is your stalk; ye, verily, never shall be harmed; ye have refreshment, ye are ever satisfied.
These feel no weariness, nor cease from flowing: swift have they flown like birds in air around us.
With Heroes wins the light of heaven, and is invincible in war:
5 O Agni, bring the Gods to taste our presents: with Indra leading, here let them be joyful.
To him, mine infant, were the waters gracious. Indra, my Son, rose up in conquering vigour.
world, I take acceptable to Indra this is thy birthplace; to Indra thee!
4.4.8 Sukta 8 – Prayer at the Consecration of a King
9 Through thee, kind -prosperer, O Brahmanaspati, may we obtain the wealth of Men which all desire:
13 O worshipped with oblations, pure Agni, we call on thee as erst,
the oblations; verily he wins cattle. He offers to the sacrificial strew; verily he wins offspring. He takes
4 Who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with his view:
Thou, gladdened by the juice, hast set the waters free, and broken Vrtra's stony fences through and
The Dawns have brought distinct perception as before: red-hued, they have attained their fulgent
5 Ye have regard unto our hymns, Nasatyas, thinking of our words:
enough for even a single night (rite). In the preceding days they perform the Brhat and the Rathantara.
Rudras, and Adityas guarded it. It produced for the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas (each) three hundred and
makes it pure [4]. He chooses the priests, verily he chooses the metres, he chooses seven; there are seven
guardian, to the lightning as bowman: do ye guard it for us, until we arrive. To the goal here, &c.
7 May waters be available for our crops. May waters be available for growing medicinal herbs which
4. Him, even this Steer who milks the heavens, him with a thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,
14 He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and barren cows, and rams, when duly set apart, are offered up,To Agni, Soma-sprinkled, drinker of sweet juice, Disposer, with my heart I bring a fair hymn forth.
13 May the foes' threatening arrow pass us by: may he put far from us our bodies' sin.
heard, is the share of the ruler of the house (Agni), and we know, too, what belonos to Nirriti (destruction) as her
3 Sharp-pointed, powerful, strong, of boundless vigour, Agni who knows the lofty hymn, kept secret
11 When Indra hath rejoiced with Kavya Usana, he mounts his steeds who swerve wider and wider yet.
6 To seat your Indra, I will spread abroad with power this song of praise.
I. YE Twain are Priests of sacrifice, wmners in war and holy works:
8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook. Dyaus thundered forth and made the air's
make a pairing. The sacrifice has a fivefold prelude and a fivefold end; there are offered five foresacrifices; there are four sacrifices to the wives, the fifth is the Samistayajus by they make up five as a
aloud, placing food and strength in themselves. The lute has a hundred strings. Man is of a hundred
3. Love of what is and what shall be, Agni, in his beloved forms,
Not disaffected, with devoted spirit this man he takes to be his friend in battles.
8 Eternal Law hath varied food that strengthens; thought of eternal Law, removes transgressions.
Intelligent drops above the station of the sea, exhilarating, dropping meath.
All these thy woes, as with the oblations' ladle at sacrifices, with my prayer I banish.
2. When we invoke thee, god grain, and thou dost listen, then do thou raise thyself up like the sky, be
1. LET your best-bearing car that must be lauded, ne'er injured, bring you Vajas and Rbhuksans.
became barren; that indeed is power (indriyá); verily straightway he obtains power. He whose ancestors
2 So, too, like charioteers are they, Mitra and sapient Varuna,
2. To thee alone, O Lord of Strength, go, as it were, all songs of praise.
body; in that he pours the Dhruva down into the goblet of the Hotr, so he places life in the body of the
plants at the joints! They whose kingdom Soma rules, the plants, shall not harbour anger against us!
8 Give to the Manas, Indra with Maruts, gifts universal, gifts of cattle foremost.
For our well-spoken hymn give life, O Indu. Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
[3]. They put her into the waters' saying, 'Come out for Yama.' She came out in the shape of an aged,
3 Whence comest thou alone, thou who art mighty, Indra, Lord of the Brave? What is thy purpose?
for the offering-spoons, in the chip for the post. When the Soma sacrifice is complete he casts (in the
Praiseworthy, known to all men. May we foster well, during a hundred winters, son and progeny.
3 When what is strong ye overthrow, and whirl about each ponderous thing,
'The unbroken web of earth may I follow', he says; verily making a bridge he crosses over.
10. By an unbeaten path he has brought it (the spell) hither, by a (beaten) path we drive it out from here. The fool
To all-subduing splendour, Usas, Mighty One, to strength, thou rich in spoil and wealth.
i To these dwellings of thine are we fain to go,
8 Hear ye the call of Atris, hear Syavasva as he sheds the juice:
c Homage to the holder of the quiver, to the owner of the quiver, to the lord of robbers homage!
What God, when by the foot thy Sire thou tookest and slewest, was at hand to give thee comfort?
Two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters, hallowing and with means of purifying.
5. When through the filter thou art poured we clothe thee with a robe of milk,
1. LET these speak loudly forth; let us speak out aloud: to the loud speaking Pressing-stones address
themselves in the troubled part of the year, for then are the two months called the end. Those who
He who offers sacrifice without faith, they place not faith in his sacrifice. He brings waters forward, the
In heaven and earth the kindred Pair commingle. On Yam! be the unbrotherly act of Yama.
let the helpers help thee. Deal among dear things, best among things to be sought, treasure lord of
Striving to win the Dawns, the light, the waters, and cattle, call to us abundant booty!
1. Agni shall skilfully march against our opponents, burning against their schemes and hostile plans; Gâtavedas
7 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker, give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels.
She travels perfectly the path of Order, nor fails to reach, as one who knows, the quarters.
m Homage to you, carpenters, and to you, makers of chariots, homage!
4 Well pleased with these bright flames and with these Soma drops, take thou away our poverty with
9 First have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, and got themselves a bride in fair apparel.
6 Do thou, O Indra, guard the conquering Heroes, and rid thee of thy wrath against the Maruts,
1. Yea, Waters, ye bring health and bliss: so help ye us to energy.
3 He goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over the roaring sound which Sarya's Daughter loves.
reverence; therefore the minds of some creatures are set on energy, those of others on rest; therefore the
What are the teeth of God that Arjun is referring to? He mentioned them in the previous verse as well. We use our teeth to grind our food. God’s teeth are his force of destruction that grinds everyone to death with the passage of time. The American poet, H.W. Longfellow wrote:Though the mills of God grind slowly,Yet they grind exceeding small;Though with patience he stands waiting,With exactness grinds he all [v9]Arjun sees the great Kaurava generals—Bheeshma, Dronacharya, and Karn—and also many of the Pandava generals rushing headlong into the mouth of the Lord, to be ground between his teeth. He is beholding the imminent future in the cosmic form of God. Since God is beyond the limits of time, so the past, present, and future are visible within him in the present.Bheeshma, the grandsire of the Kauravas and the Pandavas, was the son of Shantanu and Ganga. To facilitate his father’s wish for remarriage, Bheeshma renounced his right to the throne, and also took a lifelong vow of celibacy. However, Bheeshma had continued to support Duryodhan, despite knowing very well that he was evil and was usurping the right of the Pandavas. Thus, he was destined to die in this war of goodness versus evil. The Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam describes Bheeshma’s prayer to the Lord, when he lay on the bed of arrows at the end of his life:sapadi sakhi-vacho niśhamya madhye nija-parayor balayo rathaṁ niveśhyasthitavati para-sainikāyur akṣhṇā hṛitavati pārtha-sakhe ratir mamāstu (1.9.35)[v10]“Let my mind meditate upon Arjun’s dear pal, Shree Krishna, who obeyed his friend’s command to drive the chariot to the center of the two armies, and while there, he shortened the lifespan of the opposing generals by his mere glance.” So, Bheeshma himself was aware that the consequence of fighting against the Supreme Lord Shree Krishna would be death.Dronacharya was the guru of martial arts for both the Kauravas and the Pandavas. He was so impartial that he taught more about military science to Arjun than even to his son, Ashwatthama. However, he felt obliged to help Duryodhan because he was financially dependent upon him for his maintenance. Thus, Dronacharya too was destined to die in the war. Yet, his heroism could be judged from the fact that when the Pandavas were unable to slay him by any means and approached him for help, he told them the way in which he could be killed.Karn was the bosom friend of Duryodhan and so he fought from the side of the Kauravas. He too had heroic qualities. When Shree Krishna disclosed to him he was the eldest son of Kunti and the Pandavas were actually his brothers, he asked Shree Krishna not to disclose this secret to Yudhisthir, or else he would stop trying to kill Karn and would lose the war. Since Karn had taken the side of Duryodhan in the war, he too was destined to die.
as it were full, to obtain Prajapati [5]. He offers with a half-filled (ladle), for from the half-filled
2 I come appointed messenger of Indra, seeking your ample stores of wealth, O Panis.
of the cakes; verily he makes a stay in himself, and the Soma does not flow through him. The
3. Lord of a Hundred Powers, rise up to be our succour in this fight:
4 Indra, when born, thou madest firm thy spirit: alone thou seekest war to fight with many.
6 Bring near us those who stand aloof strike fear into our enemies:
In the previous verse, Shree Krishna explained that through bhakti the devotees enter into full awareness of him. Equipped with it, they see everything in its connection with God. They see their body, mind, and intellect as the energies of God; they see their material possessions as the property of God; they see all living beings as parts and parcels of God; and they see themselves as his tiny servants. In that divine consciousness, they do not give up work, rather they renounce the pride of being the doers and enjoyers of work. They see all work as devotional service to the Supreme, and they depend upon him for its performance.Then, upon leaving their body, they go to the divine abode of God. Just as the material realm is made from the material energy, the divine realm is made from the spiritual energy. Hence, it is free from the defects of material nature, and is perfect in every way. It is sat-chit-ānand i.e., full of eternality, knowledge, and bliss. Regarding his divine realm, Shree Krishna had said in verse 15.6: “Neither the sun nor the moon, nor fire can illumine that Supreme Abode of Mine. Having gone There, one does not return to this material world again.”The various forms of God have their own personal abodes in the spiritual realm, where they engage in eternal loving pastimes with their devotees. Those who perfect their selfless loving service toward him go to the abode of their worshipped form of God. Thus, the devotees of Lord Krishna go to Golok; those of Lord Vishnu go to Vaikunth; the devotees of Lord Ram go to Saket; the worshippers of Lord Shiv go to Shiv Lok; those of Mother Durga go to Devi Lok, etc. The devotees, who reach these divine abodes, having attained him, participate in his divine pastimes that are imbued with the perfection of the spiritual energy.
they say, 'If being placed on the kindling-sticks it should be lost, his fire would be dispersed, it would
1. SET this our sacrifice among the Immortals: be pleased with these our presents, Jatavedas.
waters; he who knows thus reaches not destruction in the waters. 'With thy light which is in the sky', he
we can refer to Dharma as a religion, but it is then necessary for the Dharmin to educate the nonDharmin as to the higher meaning and greater Truth of Dharma.
food. As for four, the quarters are four; verily they find support in the quarters. There are Atiratras on
The undecaying One who wields the thunder, renowned and great, great are the exploits, Indra.
if he were to sacrifice he would offer a part of the sacrificer; if he were not to sacrifice, then he would
them and asked them back; he would not give them back to him; he said, 'Choose a boon, and then give
for the gods [5]; from us let the gods be sacrificed to.' Therefore of the series of nights it is on the new
10 This newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches unto thee:
among thy fellows; I yoke thee in bonds of fellowship with me.
Parvacitti his Apsarases, his missile the lightning, his weapon the thunder.
1. THOU, Soma, dweller on the hills, effused, hast flowed into the sieve,:
3 O Omnipresent Lord! Sharpen my intellect, increase my wisdom, and make me a harder worker
As friend to friend, for splendour be thou good to men!
9 Him who waylays, yea, him who would destroy us,-aim at him, pierce him with thy sharpened
6 Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover ' to delight: the Lovely One desires and craves it from his heart.
12 They by whose splendour both the worlds are over-spread they shine on cars
His dear Ones, following his Law, have prospered the Three Dawns for him.
1. While uttering Indra's name the seers bestowed (upon men) the gangida, which the gods in the beginning had
shall lament, when a man has been slain, pierced by thee, O Arbudi!
the god that leads', with the final Anustubh he offers; the Anustubh is speech; therefore speech is the
3. Look ye on Vishnu's works whereby the friend of Indra, close allied,
Brhaspati and Pusan grant us sure defence, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman guard and shelter us.
thus he offers to Vastospati; verily he does both, and appeases him completely. If he were to offer with
the striding of the gods; he who knowing thus offers the new and the full moon (sacrifices) steps in the
3 Lord of red dawns, he came victorious, daily to the Angirases' former invocation.
3. Whether thou art burning, whether thou art scorching, or whether thou art the son of king Varuna, Hrûdu by
The Ribhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras sung thee as the first.
night, the Brhat and Rathantara prosper for me through the sacrifice.
5 May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited to their favourite oblations.
with the heart, Rudra with the blood, Çarva with the kidneys, Mahadeva with the intestinal flesh, him
4 The kinsman, Agni, of mankind, their well beloved Friend art thou,
sacrifice [2]. 'Before the Uktha it should be poured down', they say, for in front one enjoys life; 'In the
20 What mortal, O immortal Dawn, enjoyeth thee? Where lovest thou?
of strength' [5], he should put (it) on either upwards or downwards; verily he deprives him of strength. If
Thus from kshetriya, from Nirriti, from the curse of the kinswoman, from the Druh, from the fetter of Varuna do I
stupid, utterly bad, as the funeral cow, she becomes for him in yonder world three hundred and thirtythree. Speech is the thousandth. Therefore [4] a boon must be given; for she is a boon, and when she is
Whom the impetuous Maruts look upon with love, who moves in splendour on their ways.
4 Indra, the Rbhus' Lord, I invocate for aid, the Rbhus, Vajas, Maruts to the Soma draught.
and well-fed die too. The wealth of the rich man who generously gives, does not run out. On the other
Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the presser's Soma, Asvins drink.
7. Go far away, failure! Thy missile do we avert. I know thee (to be) oppressive and piercing, O Arâti!
12 So give us, Lord of Power and Might, riches combined with hero strength,
3. Fail not when marching onward: come hither, like-spirited, stay not far away
They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation seated on sacred grass, come oftenest hither.
1. Sing to your Agni with each song, at every sacrifice for strength.
2. This woman shall be subjected to thee as thy wife, O king Yama; (till then) let her be fixed to the house of her
13 Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give hero sons and riches to the eloquent.
16 Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra's heart, as rivers pass into the sea,
5 Let us obtain, O Indra, plenteous wealth and food, with strength exceeding glorious, shining to the
The master of the Kine lives many a year with these, the Cows whereby he pours his gifts and serves
whomever he hates as he puts (them) down; verily he cuts him off for these deities; swiftly he goes to
1. What this black bird flying forth towards (me) has dropped here--may the waters protect me from all that
Accordant with the Vasus and the Rudras, Agni, Vaisvanara, give us sure protection.
serves) for conquest. In that he keeps the fire in the pan for a year, he [2] saves this world by it; in that
Pour on us rain from heaven, send us the water's flow, urging our thoughts to win the spoil!
10 Thou shonest forth, O Agni, after former dawns, all visible, O rich in light.
Then when the Aryan tribes chose as Invoking Priest Agni the Wonder-Worker, and the hymn rose up.
3 Who are the men whom thou wilt further, Indra, who strive to win thy bliss allied with riches?
5 The Eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven; in the sky's vault the dark impetuous ones have
5 Heroes with noble horses, fain for battle, selected warriors, call on me in combat.
'Hail!'; verily he finds support in the world of heaven. So many are the worlds of the gods; verily in them
the concluding oblations of the sacrifices, therefore does he say that. If (the cow) were not bound, she
becomes better for him who has so sacrificed. What the gods did at the sacrifice, the Asuras did. The
15 O Agni, with this fuel will we serve thee; accept the laud we sing to thee with favour
41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave:
great as it were who piles the fire, the steed has a thunderbolt; 'hastening come hither, trampling the
first they offer prospers, and wins this battle. The kindling-wood is from the Madhuka tree [3]; the coals
11 Formed with twelve spokes, by length of time, unweakened, rolls round the heaven this wheel of
8 Hymns were the cross-bars of the pole, Kurira-metre decked the car:
In luckless game I call on you for succour . strengthen us also on the field of battle.
7 Thunder and roar: the germ of life deposit. Fly round us on thy chariot waterladen.
4 May Ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear thee forward on the distant pathway.
Indra, to whom all beings turn their constant thought,-him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
For him the ancient, great, strong, energetic, the very mighty wielder of the thunder.
4 Tell thou us this, if at thy hand aforetime the earlier singers have obtained good fortune,
2 She comes in front, fair, rousing up the people, making the pathways easy to be travelled.
13 When, Indra, in the mighty fray thou urgest chargers to their speed,
two are drawn together, the last two together; therefore the seasons are in pairs. The season-vessel has
Shree Krishna now describes the origin of the demoniac disposition, and pinpoints lust, anger, and greed as the three causes for it. Previously, in verse 3.36, Arjun had asked him why people are impelled to commit sin, even unwillingly, as if by force. Shree Krishna had answered that it is lust, which later transforms into anger, and is the all-devouring enemy of the world. Greed is also a transformation of lust, as explained in detail in the commentary of verse 2.62. Together, lust, anger, and greed are the foundations from which the demoniac vices develop. They fester in the mind and make it a suitable ground for all other vices to take root. Consequently, Shree Krishna labels them as gateways to hell, and strongly advices to shun them to avoid self-destruction. Those desirous of welfare should learn to dread these three and carefully avoid their presence in their own personality.
May agonies of burning be his portion. May the sky scorch the man who hates devotion.
4. Directed by the sisters ten, bellowing on his way this Steer
world of heaven. They said to it, 'How hast thou been left?' 'I have not been anointed', he said, 'just as an
He rubs the enclosing-sticks; verily he purifies them. Thrice each he rubs them, for the sacrifice is thrice
6 If he, thy true ally, hath sinned against thee, still, Varuna, he is the friend thou lovedst.
Is lauded, excellent, with hundred praises by Purunitha, son of Satavani.
4 Simply, ye Mighty Ones, I ask the Gods of that wondrous oblation hallowed by the mystic word.
Like the deft Maker of the band of Maruts, the bright impetuous One hath shone refulgent.
10. The earth which the Asvins have measured, upon which Vishnu has stepped out, which Indra, the lord of
visiting with you. He is present in all men and in greater measure in the body of the priest and virtuous
3 Associate with him, as teams of horses, help, manly might, and vigour follow Indra.
indirectly; she went to the gods; the cattle choose the gods, cattle deserted the Asuras. If he desire of a
bestow growth upon him, he grows with offspring and cattle; moreover in that he offers these oblations,
On knowing that work can be performed without attachment to the fruits, a natural question arises: “What constitutes action?” Shree Krishna announces to Arjun that he is going to address this question now, as this knowledge will help develop detachment from the results of actions. Simultaneously, he clarifies that the description of the five limbs of action is not a new analysis, but what has previously been described in the Sānkhya philosophy as well. Sānkhya refers to the system of philosophy established by Maharishi Kapil, who was a descension of God and appeared on the earth as the child of Kardam Muni and Devahuti. The Sānkhya philosophy he propounded is based upon a system of analytical rationality. It develops knowledge of the self through an analysis of the elements within the body and in the world. It also ascertains the nature of cause and effect by an analysis of the elements of action.
2. Because, when sent forth by Varuna, ye then quickly did bubble up; then Indra met (âpnot) you, as ye went,
5 O Indra, cause to sprout again three places, these which I declare,My father's head, his cultured field, and this the part below my waist.
To Prajapati he made obeisance, to creatures he made obeisance; as Prajapati with creatures made
Sitting on sacred grass, ye Sons of Bharata, drink Soma from the Potar's bowl, O Men of heaven.
And, Agni, having scattered all assailants, bring to us the possessions of our foemen.
1. MAY the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled meath, giving the sacrifice's lord uninjured life;
Shining, O God, with Gods in clear effulgence. Let not a mortal's evil will obstruct us.
11 Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, sped Gods and men with mighty operation.
4 Preserve us, Agni, with perpetual succour, refulgent in the dwelling which thou lovest.
7 Here, Indra, drink thou Soma with the Maruts, as thou didst drink the juice beside Saryata.
4 May that much-lauded Indu, with a heart inclined to us, well-knowing, fight against our enemies.
The intellect wherewith ye wrought the two Bay Steeds,-through these, O Rbhus, ye attained divinity.
Hide ye and bury it in pathless darkness that not a man oF them may know the other!
Do thou no harm to our yet unborn offspring: our trust is in thy mighty Indra-power.
3. Thou goest at the head of the plants, spreading lustre, as if with a light. Thou art on the one hand the protector
abounds in light, and is rich in honey, in that do ye in the fulness of time come together with your children!
11 They who have stablished year and month and then the day, night, sacrifice and holy verse,
Trinava (Stoma) on either side (of the Ukthya), with verses addressed to Indra, for conquest. There is an
5 For thou, O Indra, makest yet more bold the spirit of the bold
1 INDRA the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their lauds,
of worshippers', he says; verily with it he bestows eyesight upon both gods and men. He steps upon (the
Sanjay understood Dhritarashtra’s concern, who wanted an assurance that the battle would eventuate. Sanjay tried to allay his worry by informing that the Pandava army was standing in a military formation, ready for battle. Then he moved on to tell him what his son Duryodhana was doing on the battlefield.As King Dhritarashtra was blind, his eldest son Duryodhana virtually ruled the kingdom of Hastinapur. In the Mahabharata, he is described as very rude, egoistic, evil and cruel by nature. Since his childhood, he had a strong dislike for the Pandavas and left no opportunity to demean them. He was aware that to rule over the entire kingdom of Hastinapur unchallenged he needed to eliminate them. However, standing on the battlefield, when he saw the large Pandava army, he was baffled. He had underestimated the Pandavas, the extent of military might they had gathered was way beyond his expectation.Duryodhana approached his guru Dronacharya with the pretense of offering respect, but his actual purpose was to palliate his own nervousness. His move towards his guru also reveals that the mammoth military formation of the Pandava army unnerved him and he was now fearful of the outcome of this war.The next nine verses are spoken by Duryodhan.
2. Thereafter they, as is their wont, resumed the state of new-born babes,
Having performed the rite with the omentum, he performs with the cake; the cake is strength; verily he
To the Cow's Master come the Cows inquiring: the hymns with eager longing come to Soma.
4 O Goddesses, is this your car, I ask you, ancient this day, or is it new, ye Mornings,
4 The Maruts spread the mist abroad and make mountains rock and reel,
2. These morning sacrifices call you, Asvins, at the break of day.
desire [5] of the sacrificer that (the sacrifice) should proceed to its conclusion without injury. 'Thou art
4 Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the primal seed and germ of Spirit.
In English language, there is a popular idiom, “as sure as death.” Benjamin Franklin said: “The only things certain in life are death and taxes.” The most certain thing in life is that we will meet with death one day. Psychologists categorize the fear of death as the biggest fear in life. In Patanjali’s Yog Darśhan too, abhiniveśh, or the instinctive urge to survive at all costs, is mentioned as a trait of the material intellect. But for one who has taken birth, death is inevitable. So when something is inevitable, why lament over it?The Mahabharat relates an incident regarding this. During the period of their exile in the forest, one day while wandering the five Pandavas were thirsty and came across a well. Yudhishthir asked Bheem to go and fetch water for all of them. When Bheem reached the well, a yakṣha (semi-celestial being) began speaking from inside the well, “I will only let you take the water if you first answer my questions.” Bheem paid no heed and proceeded to draw water. The yakṣha pulled him in. After some time when Bheem did not return, a concerned Yudhishthir sent Arjun to see what was happening and fetch water. When Arjun reached the well, the yakṣha asked him too, “I have already seized your brother. Do not attempt to draw the water unless you can answer all my questions correctly.” Arjun also paid no heed, and the yakṣha pulled him into the well. The other brothers, Nakul and Sahadev, followed him, but met with the same fate. Finally, Yudhishthir himself came to the well. Once again, the yakṣha said, “Answer my questions if you want to drink water from the well, or I will pull you in, just as I have done to your four brothers.” Yudhisthir agreed to answer the questions. The yakṣha was actually the celestial God of death, Yamraj, in disguise. He asked sixty questions, each of which was answered perfectly by Yudhishthir. One of these questions was: kim āśhcharyaṁ? “What is the most surprising thing in this world?” Yudhisthir replied:ahany ahani bhūtāni gachchhantīha yamālayamśheṣhāḥ sthiratvam ichchhanti kimāśhcharyamataḥ param (Mahabharat) [v30]“At every moment people are dying. Those who are alive are witnessing this phenomenon, and yet they do not think that one day they will also have to die. What can be more astonishing than this?” Shree Krishna explains in this verse that life is inescapably a dead end, and so a wise person does not lament over the inevitable.
c For offspring thee! For expiration thee! For cross-breathing thee! Breathe thou after offspring. Let
The Deities conduct the pious man to them: like suitors they delight in him who loveth prayer.
10 Accepting this our sacrifice and this our praise, O Soma, come,
7 O men who lift the ladles up, these hewn and planted in the ground,
18 Agni, with noble psalm that tells his wish he dwells, thinking on thee who guardest him.
2. Three names hast thou, O kushtha, (namely: kushtha), na-ghâ-mâra ('forsooth-no-death'), and na-ghâ-risha
When two opposing hosts contend in battle for seed and offspring, waters, kine, or corn-lands.
15 O Dawn enriched with holy rites, yoke to thy car thy purple steeds,
Made for the Firm and Strong are these libations. The pressing-stones are set and fire is kindled.
the Rathantara, (Samans). The Rathantara, is this (earth), the Brhat is yonder (sky); verily with them do
c Thou art the stepping of Visnu, thou art the step of Visnu, thou art the stride of Visnu
4 Happily work our steers and men, may the plough furrow happily.
soothes him with his portion. 'For him indeed is the Çatarudriya offered in truth', they say, 'for whom
Ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in three spots: in all, ten thousand kine.
4. Pûshan shall from the east place his right hand about us, shall bring again to us what has been lost: we shall
39. Fiercely does the (supposed) sterile cow burn when she herds with the cattle, though she be a (fruitful) cow.
3 Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: formed is the furrow, sow the seed within it.
z Him who with might riseth from the depth to the top,
verily becoming a hawk he flies to the world of heaven. He should pile in heron form who desires, 'May
Ye Princes, lauded, that we may press forward to each point of heaven.
10 Symmetrical in flank, with rounded haunches, mettled like heroes, the Celestial Coursers
1. FROM thee, as branches from a tree, O Agni, from thee, Auspicious God! spring all our blessingsWealth swiftly, strength in battle with our foemen, the rain besought of heaven, the flow of waters.
yoked would fall away, the libations would be without support, the Stomas without support, the hymns
4 Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshipping Sudaksa's draught,
The material nature is called Maya, or prakṛiti. Being an energy of God, it has existed ever since He has existed; in other words, it is eternal. The soul is also eternal, and here it is called puruṣh (the living entity), while God Himself is called param puruṣh (the Supreme Living Entity).The soul is also an expansion of the energy of God. śhaktitvenaivāṁśhatvaṁ vyañjayanti (Paramātma Sandarbh 39.1) “The soul is a fragment of the jīva śhakti (soul energy) of God.” While material nature is an insentient energy, the jīva śhakti is a sentient energy. It is divine and intransmutable. It remains unchanged through different lifetimes, and the different stages of each lifetime. The six stages through which the body passes in one lifetime are: asti (existence in the womb), jāyate (birth), vardhate (growth), vipariṇamate (procreation), apakṣhīyate (diminution), vinaśhyati (death). These changes in the body are brought about by the material energy, called prakṛiti, or Maya. It creates the three modes of nature—sattva, rajas, and tamas—and their countless varieties of combinations.
The Waters' Child, the blessed, the resplendent One, victorious and beyond compare.
1. Of yore, (O Agni), thou wast worthy of supplication at the sacrifice; thou wast the priest in olden times, and now
share; verily they free him from his evil case. He should offer at the new moon; verily with its waxing
8 Agni is Sovran Lord of wealth, Agni of great prosperity:
self-existing Kasyapa and the tapas (creative fervour) from Time were born.
2 For the broad Sun was seen a path more widely laid, the path of holy law hath been maintained with
Verily he has recourse to Indra of the thunderbolt with his own share; he bestows his thunderbolt on
The Bounteous, when we serve the Gods, accepteth song yet more famous and the gifts we bring him.
q In unison men that make prayers offer to thee this prayer
1. If we have done wrong to the Earth, the skies, or the Heavens; or if we have offended our mother or father –
c Thou art the navel of kingly power, thou are the womb of kingly power.
5. The paths were golden, and golden were the oars; golden were the ships, upon which they carried forth the
Çatarudriya, he soothes with it his dread form; in that he offers the stream of wealth, he delights with it
6. In the east rises the sun, seen by all, slaying that which is not seen; slaying the seen and the unseen (worms),
21. The earth, clothed in Agni, with dark knees, shall make me brilliant and alert!
1. We in King Soma place our trust, in Agni, and in Varuna,
filterIndu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens, for the God's enjoyment.
5 Let, Lord of Hundred Powers, thy Steeds be harnessed on the right and left.
went to Manu; the gods and the Asuras called severally upon her, the gods directly, the Asuras
5. Love's consuming longing, together with yearning, which Mitra and Varuna have poured into the waters, that do
8 Let not the Companies of Gods fail us, like Dawns that float away,
The word ātmā has been used in multiple ways in the Vedic literature: for God, for the soul, for the mind, and for the intellect. This verse typifies all these uses. Shree Krishna describes the karm yogi who is yog yukt (united in consciousness with God). He says that such a noble soul is: 1) viśhuddhātmā, of purified intellect, 2) vijitātmā, who has conquered the mind, and 3) jitendriya, one who has controlled the senses.Such karm yogis, with purified intellect, see God situated in all living beings, and behave respectfully toward everyone without attachment. Since their actions are not motivated by the desire for self-enjoyment, their knowledge is progressively clarified. As their desires are eliminated, the senses, mind, and intellect that were being propelled for sense pleasures come under control. These instruments are now available for the service of the Lord. Devotional service leads to realized knowledge from within. In this way, karm-yog naturally brings about these successive stages of enlightenment, and hence is no different from karm sanyās.
1. I AM the royal Ruler, mine is empire, as mine who sway all life are all Immortals.
Impetuous God, when thou hast drunk the Soma, enraptured send us cattle in abundance.
6. Indu sends forth a voice on high, up in the region of the sea.
the prosperity of the sacrifice. The sacrificial fee is a renovated chariot, a newly-sewn garment, a
7 Come now and let us glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymns.
verily he avoids the sacrificial post. Prajapati created the sacrifice. Being created it went away. It
Having said that worship of the personal form is the best, Shree Krishna clarifies that in no way does He reject the worship of the formless. Those who devote themselves to the all-pervading, indefinable, unmanifest, inconceivable, immovable, eternal Brahman, also attain God.Living beings are of an infinite variety of natures. The Supreme Lord who has created this variety also possesses an infinite variety of aspects to His personality. For the sake of our finite comprehension, we classify the infinite manifestations of God into categories. Accordingly, Ved Vyas has classified God’s various manifestations into three types, Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān, as mentioned in the commentary of the previous verse. One may worship either of these categories, but one should never claim that one’s conception of God is the only correct one while those of the others are erroneous.In verse 4.11, Shree Krishna had stated: “In whatever way people surrender unto Me, I reciprocate accordingly. Everyone follows My path, knowingly or unknowingly, O son of Pritha.” Here, Shree Krishna confirms that the worshippers of the formless also reach Him. Since their choice is to unite with the attributeless manifestation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, God meets them as the unmanifest, all-pervading Brahman.
2 Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, sprung from four seas, the prop and stay of
3 Let Indra drink the pressed-out Soma, Helper and mighty Guide of him who sings his praises.
Led by the men he takes the milk for raiment: then shall he, through his powers, engender praisesongs.
18 Compass about, our faithful Friend, all our possessions with thy might:
9 So, Son of Strength, tbou aidest us to what is great and excellent.
2 Thine is the Herald's, thine the Cleanser's office, thinker art thou, wealth-giver, true to Order.
Knew him who moved with blessed Friends in secret, with the young Dames of heaven. He stayed not
2.3.2.5 Mantra 5: The Mantras for the Drinking to the Soma
For this oblation found for man the cattle, and Indra, having quaffed it, slew the Dragon.
messengers?]! That Agni who knows the way to save do I engage for this man, that he be exempt from harm!
3. Good guidance hath the mortal man whom Arya-man, the Marut host,
8. Indra whose wealth is in thyself, what mortal will attack this man?
18 Their kin, the Prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman, turning his thought to thee thus speaks in
1. Come, Agni, praised with song, to feast and sacrificial offering: sit
Bhaga, augment our store of kine and horses, Bhaga, may we be rich in men and heroes.
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame
Tristubh metre. He recites the Samyana hymns, then recites the Sodaçin, that the day may be made firm
6 Far from me, Varuna, remove all danger accept me graciously, thou Holy Sovran.
the eastern, the Pitrs the southern, men the western, the Rudras the northern. In that he makes a hall with
Shree Krishna explains in this verse that the celestial delights of the heavenly abodes are temporary. After people who have been promoted there have fully enjoyed heavenly pleasures and exhausted their merits, they are sent back to the earthly plane. Thus, attaining promotion to the heavenly abodes does not fulfill the eternal quest of the soul. We have all been there many times in endless past lifetimes, and yet the hunger of the soul for infinite Bliss has not yet been satiated. All the Vedic scriptures support this belief:tāvat pramodate swarge yāvat puṇyaṁ samāpyatekṣhīṇa puṇyaḥ patatyarvāganichchhan kāla-chālitaḥ (Bhagavatam 11.10.26)“Residents of heaven enjoy the celestial delights until their merits have been exhausted. Then they are reluctantly forced to fall back to the lower abodes by the passage of time.”swargahu swalpa anta dukhadāī (Ramayan)“The attainment of heaven is temporary, and is followed by miseries.”Just as a football gets kicked all over the field, Maya is kicking the soul around in forgetfulness of God. Sometimes it goes to the lower abodes, while sometimes to the higher abodes. Amongst these multitudes of forms it receives, across the lower and higher abodes, only the human form offers the facility for God-realization. Hence, the scriptures state that even the celestial gods pray to be given birth as a human being, so that they may rectify their previous mistake of going to heaven, and strive toward God-realization.durlabhaṁ mānuṣhaṁ janma prārthayate tridaśhairapi (Nārad Purāṇ)“The human form is exceedingly rare. Even the celestial gods pray to attain it.” Thus, Lord Ram instructed the residents of Ayodhya:baṛeñ bhāga mānuṣha tanu pāvā, sura durlabha saba granthanhi gāvā (Ramayan)“O people of Ayodhya, you all are extremely fortunate to have been bestowed a human birth, which is exceedingly rare and is desired even by the residents of heaven.” When the celestial beings long for a human birth, then why should we humans seek promotion to the celestial abodes? Rather, we should aim for God-realization by engaging in devotion to the Supreme Lord.
2 A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they obtain.
Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth to the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all.
Ye, came unto the calling of the weakling's dame, and granted noble offspring to the happy wife.
3. Giving security, Lord of wide dominion, send us both heaven and earth with all their fulness!
1 To splendid Agni seated by the altar, loving well his home, I bring the food as 'twere his place of birth.
6 O Agni, by thy succour and by Mitra's friendly furtherance,
t By sacrifice to the god Tvastr, may I prosper the form of cattle.
The Adityas desired, 'Let us go to the world of heaven.' They discerned not the world of heaven, they
verily he prospers in yonder world. In that it is offered on eight pot sherds, it is connected with Agni, in
go who creep to the Bahispavamana (Stotra) when the Bahispavamana has been sung [1], he says,
2.3.1.9 Mantra 9: The Offerings at the End of the Pressings
Agni as the point, Soma as the socket, Visnu as the shaft. They said, 'Who shall shoot it?' [1] 'Rudra',
instigation of god Savitr', he says, for instigation. Agni went away from the gods, he entered the reed; he
its not dawning; verily he wins the dawn. 'Kindling thee for a hundred winters' [5], he says; man lives a
from the Agrayana with the Antaryama vessel, verily he draws it off from its own birthplace. The Allgods [1] could not perform the third pressing; they led Savitr who shares in the first pressing to the third
2. Those two boils (testicles) of thine, O balasa, that are fixed upon the arm-pits-I know the remedy for that: the
taken (to us)! Adoration be to the power of grudge, the power of failure, adoration to Arâti!
4. That thou much-lauded! many-named! mayst, with this thought, that longs for milk,
i May the victorious among quarters, with the Saman, the strong one,
6 Drink, Indra and Brhaspati, the Soma in the giver's house:
Agni knows well all these created beings. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
4.6.8 Sukta 8 – Charm to secure the love of a Woman
Here was he born, firm-seated in his station Immortal, ever waxing in his body.
Wax, Bright One, and give strength to him who lauds thee. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with
Bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest when, Maghavan, with food thou art invited.
He beareth up this earth and heaven, and, doer of marvels, he begot the Sun and Morning.
around', he says; he who rushes around is the mind; verily he delights the mind. 'For Tanunaptra', he
15 Seven heroes from the nether part ascended, and from the upper part came eight together.
She brought Martanda thitherward to spring to life and die again.
6 Drive thou away the Dasyu with thy weapon. As, gaining vital power for thine own body,
4 Accept the sacrifice, attend to this my call: come nigh, O ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.
With his close comrades doing deeds of glory,-may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
5 Let prelude sound and following chant so let him hear the Saman sung,
God of the golden tongue, keep us for newest bliss: let not the evil-wisher have us in his power.
Yea, to the liberal mortal who rernaineth at home, O Goddess Dawn, much good thou bringest.
We, when we ride o'er ridges of the waters, will swing within that swing and there be happy.
Is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, amid the ten surrounding arms.
Swift as the thought, your car hath been sent onward to food of many a sort and dainty viands.
8 Sweet strains that glorify him play like waters speeding down a slope,
1. INDRA, great in his power and might, and like Parjanya rich in rain,
The Dawns depart and come again again assuming their wonted forms that promise happy fortune.
2 Even as it moveth near my hymn is lifted up, and all the regions come together to sing praise.
3. Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above the earth.
4 This, Indra, was thy hero deed, Dancer, thy first and ancient work, worthy to be told forth in heaven,
Food followeth close upon your bright appearing when stately horses in your chariot draw you.
brave. You defend the doers of virtuous deeds. You make it possible for men to acquire hundreds and
So may we, strong in children and descendants, go, wealthy, to the banquet that awaits you.
50 Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send, purified, miIch-kine, abundant yielders.
24 For me the Bays are ready when I start, or start not, with the dawn, Innocuous in the ways they take.
4 His song of praise pervades the earth and heaven - let the wise worshipper draw it, like a courser.
21 The thirty thousand Disas he with magic power and weapons sent
bolt, the portions of the oblation are a bolt [4], the Vasat call is a bolt; thus forges be a threefold bolt and
We shall associate with the generous, the kind, and the learned.
May the Five Priests' Lord, dwelling in oblations, bliss-giving Asura, hear, whose paths are open.
This is an extremely popular verse of the Bhagavad Gita, so much so that even most school children in India are familiar with it. It offers deep insight into the proper spirit of work and is often quoted whenever the topic of karm yog is discussed. The verse gives four instructions regarding the science of work: 1) Do your duty, but do not concern yourself with the results. 2) The fruits of your actions are not for your enjoyment. 3) Even while working, give up the pride of doership. 4) Do not be attached to inaction.Do your duty, but do not concern yourself with the results. We have the right to do our duty, but the results are not dependent only upon our efforts. A number of factors come into play in determining the results—our efforts, destiny (our past karmas), the will of God, the efforts of others, the cumulative karmas of the people involved, the place and situation (a matter of luck), etc. Now if we become anxious for results, we will experience anxiety whenever they are not according to our expectations. So Shree Krishna advises Arjun to give up concern for the results and instead focus solely on doing a good job. The fact is that when we are unconcerned about the results, we are able to focus entirely on our efforts, and the result is even better than before.A humorous acronym for this is NATO or Not Attached to Outcome. Consider its application to a simple everyday activity such as playing golf. When people play golf, they are engrossed in the fruits—whether their score is under par, over par, etc. Now if they could merely focus on playing the shots to the best of their ability, they would find it the most enjoyable game of golf they have ever played. Additionally, with their complete focus on the shot being played, their game would be raised to a higher level.The fruits of your actions are not for your enjoyment. To perform actions is an integral part of human nature. Having come into this world, we all have various duties determined by our family situation, social position, occupation, etc. While performing these actions, we must remember that we are not the enjoyers of the results—the results are meant for the pleasure of God. The individual soul is a tiny part of God (verse 15.7), and hence our inherent nature is to serve him through all our actions.dāsa bhūtamidaṁ tasya jagatsthāvara jangamamśhrīmannārāyaṇa swāmī jagatāṁprabhurīśhwaraḥ (Padma Puran)[v40]“God is the Master of the entire creation; all moving and non-moving beings are his servants.” Material consciousness is characterized by the following manner of thoughts, “I am the proprietor of all that I possess. It is all meant for my enjoyment. I have the right to enhance my possessions and maximize my enjoyment.” The reverse of this is Spiritual consciousness, which is characterized by thoughts such as, “God is the owner and enjoyer of this entire world. I am merely his selfless servant. I must use all that I have in the service of God.” Accordingly, Shree Krishna instructs Arjun not to think of himself as the enjoyer of the fruits of his actions.Even while working, give up the pride of doership. Shree Krishna wants Arjun to give up kartritwābhimān, or the ego of being the doer. He instructs Arjun never to chase after preconceived motives attached to his actions nor consider himself as the cause of the results of his actions. However, when we perform actions, then why should we not consider ourselves as the doers of those actions? The reason is that our senses, mind, and intellect are inert; God energizes them with his power and puts them at our disposal. As a result, only with the help of the power we receive from him, are we able to work. For example, the tongs in the kitchen are inactive by themselves, but they get energized by someone’s hand, and then they perform even difficult tasks, such as lifting burning coal, etc. Now if we say that the tongs are the doers of actions, it will be inaccurate. If the hand did not energize them, what would they be able to do? They would merely lie inert on the table. Similarly, if God did not supply our body-mind-soul mechanism with the power to perform actions, we could have done nothing. Thus, we must give up the ego of doing, remembering that God is the only source of the power by which we perform all our actions.All the above thoughts are very nicely summarized in the following popular Sanskrit verse:yatkṛitaṁ yatkariṣhyāmi tatsarvaṁ na mayā kṛitamtvayā kṛitaṁ tu phalabhuk tvameva madhusūdana [v41]“Whatever I have achieved and whatever I wish to achieve, I am not the doer of these. O Madhusudan, you are the real doer, and you alone are the enjoyer of their results.”Do not be attached to inaction. Although the nature of the living being is to work, often situations arise where work seems burdensome and confusing. In such cases, instead of running away from it, we must understand and implement the proper science of work, as explained by Shree Krishna to Arjun. However, it is highly inappropriate if we consider work as laborious and burdensome, and resort to inaction. Becoming attached to inaction is never the solution and is clearly condemned by Shree Krishna.
2 Producing light for all the world of creatures, God Savitar hath raised aloft his banner.
5. His home is with the Mûgavants, his home with the Mahâvrishas. From the moment of thy birth thou art
14 These know their own abiding-place: like calves beside the mother cows
19 O ye Adityas, this your might is not to be despised by us:
4 Let your well-harnessed horses bear you hither: hitherward let them come with reins drawn tightly.
1. The Strong hath flowed forth in a thousand streams, flowed through the filter and the sheep's long
1. Let us not tire or be afraid with thee, the mighty, for our friend!
4 Wandering through, the Parents, strengthening the floods, the Sage makes his place swell with his
seventeenfold; (verily it serves) to gain Prajapati. (He should cut one) of twenty-one cubits for one who
15 May this my laud attain the troop of Maruts, those who are youths in act, the Sons of Rudra.
Wind-sped, the Skillful Ones in rapid motion have in an instant compassed round the heaven.
15 The cheerful Priest, the pure, in whom no guile is found, Friend of the House, praise-worthy, dear to
Come thou to drink the Soma juice, God, longed for on thy team-drawn car!
May Indra from the front and from the centre, as Friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.
These Twain stand fast and wax not old for ever: these have sung praise to many a day and morning.
And in the birthplace of the creator, in the place of good action,
2. He beautifies himself through the sheep's long fine wool, the bounteous, like the racing steed,
g O Agni, of a thousand eyes [2], of a hundred heads,
1. This is thine own. Thou drawest near, as turns a pigeon to his mate:
17 The brown that match the wind in speed, and bright bay coursers fleet of foot,
With sweetest song I grasp, O Mighty Indra, thy garment's hem as a child grasps his father's.
Here, O ye Rbhus, is this sea for all the Gods: sate you with Soma offered with the hallowing word.
Agni hath put that right, all-knower, he who belongeth to all men;
1. This potent herb do I dig out: it draws toward me the eve, causes (love's) tears. It brings back him who has
Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarksya for our weal will we call hither.
O Heroes, give us high renown and these good things of earth for help.
were they two talking. She who is given in the sacrifice supports the gods with her expiration; she by
sacrifice to obtain its blessing. Viçvarupa, Tvastr's son, vomited over the beast from above; therefore
3 Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he. seeketh men with rich food whose treasures are abundant.
2. Bhaga has raised him up, Soma with his rays (has raised) him up, the Maruts, the gods, (have raised) him up,
5 The Rbhus, with a rod measured, as 'twere a field, the single sacrificial chalice. wide of mouth,
4 His chariot decked with pearl, of various colours, lofty, with golden pole, the God hath mounted,
8. 'Parikshit has procured for us a secure dwelling when he, the most excellent one, weat to his seat.' (Thus) the
Mighty and awful be your arms, that none may wound or injure you!
Hither may this our hymn attract thee to our help, the hymn which Gotamas have made.
21 With various aids this day come to us, Indra, with best aids speed us, Maghavan, thou Hero.
7 Aid us in holy rites, O Man: O Pavamana, drive away
2 May Agni the resplendent hear my calling through all my songs, Immortal, keen of insight.
13 Loud hath she lowed, licking the other's youngling. On what world hath the Milch-cow laid her
6 By choice victorious, recognize thy portion: with thee for envoy may we speak like Manu.
This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone: ye visit him who offers gifts.
5 When they in dazzling rush have made the mountains roar, and shaken heaven's high back in their
These savours of thy juices work like creatures that have mighty necks.
8 With harnessed team like heroes overcoming troops, the friendly Maruts, laden with their watercasks,
May the wrath of the brilliant evil worker (pass over us);
Who shall to mighty Aditi restore us, that I may see my Father and my Mother?
Drops born as Law prescribes, that find the light of heavenj
the two eyes are on either side of the nose, therefore by the nose the eyes are separated. The Yajya, and
5 Indra, thou breakest up the floods and portals on all sides, and the firmness of the mountain.
26 May Deva Pusan himself lead you by hand from here. May the Ashvins carry you in their own
15 So may your favouring help be turned to us-ward, your kindness like a Iowing cow approach us,
13 Like a dear son who must be decked, the Lovely One hath clad him in a shining robe.
The fleece retains his solid parts as though impure, and bright and cleansed he seeks the special place
9 Yea, of a truth, his magnitude surpasseth the magnitude of earth, mid-air, and heaven.
conceal his offspring, who being fit for offspring, yet obtains not offspring; so let a man who desires
Unweariedly thou bearest up the offerer's gifts, then shinest bright among the Gods.
6 Bind to the pole with cords of holy Order the long-maned ruddy steeds who sprinkle fatness.
verily thereby he yokes it for strength. He gathers with the ass; therefore the ass is the best burdengatherer of animals. He gathers with the ass; therefore the ass, even when grazing is bad, becomes fat
worlds were disturbed [1]. The gods said, 'Let us change them about.' (Saying), 'O Agni, come hither for
12 O Soma,-for the feast of Gods, river-like he hath swelled with surge,
4 So like a Bull thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trough, the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat,
When, like a line, the Babe springs up erectly, his Mother straight hath borne him strong to bless us.
therefore reverence should be paid to the fire. Prajapati created cattle; being created they entered day
3. Hawk seated in the press, bird wide-extended, the banner seeking kine and wielding weapons,
omits, that of himself he omits. 'Thy kindling-sticks, O Agni, thine [1] abodes', he says; this is the self
He hath gone up the heights of earth and heaven, and made each monster fall and cease from
A hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, and full of sacred truth.
2 Effused, this juice victorious flows for Indra, for his maintenance.
6 With that same eye of thine wherewith thou lookest brilliant Varuna,
1. He hath appeared, best prosperer, in whom men lay their holy acts:
b The compact, possessing all the Samans, the sun is the Gandharva, his Apsarases are the rays (called)
5 Hither his Bay Steeds have been sent, red Steeds are on the sacred grass,,
3. Bring the Gods hither, Agni, born for him who trims the Sacred grass:
3. Thou didst produce him, deathless one! for mortal man, for maintenance of Law and lovely Amrita:
The Heroes, hasting, by themselves have yoked their deer for victory.
Speeding with winged steeds through dustless spaces, out of the bosom of the flood they bore him.
foundation of the Ançu becomes possessed of a foundation. The Saman is that called the Vamadevya;
Most liberal, completing sacrifice for men, O Indra, pure bright Soma, Indu, flows for thee.
3. A full jar has been placed upon Time; him, verily, we see existing in many forms. He carries away all these
3 I Varuna am Indra: in their greatness, these the two wide deep fairly-fashioned regions,
1. ACTIVE and bright have they come forth, impetuous in speed like bulls,
These the Seven Rivers flowing on their downward path increase the vital vigour of the potent Steer.
11. The cow herself, when slaughtered, came down upon the Vaitahavyas. who had roasted for themselves the
he pierces. Indra having slain Vrtra went to the furthest distance, thinking, 'I have done amiss'; he
6 All Soma juices are his own for ever, most gladdening draughts are ever his, the Mighty,
4 To mighty Narasamsa, strengthening his might, to Pusan, ruler over men, we pray with hymns.
This Trta Aptya knoweth well, and speaketh out for brotherhood. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and
potsherds [2]; verily he led him to the top of the gods; he made as the Yajya and the Anuvakya (verses)
With these, O Son of Strength, O Jatavedas, guard us, preserve these princes and the singers.
should offer an oblation to Soma and Pusan; man has Soma as his deity, cattle are connected with Pusan;
Come thence unto our rite, true boon-best-ower: through love of thee have we prepared oblations.
17 Pour on us rain celestial, quickly streaming, refreshing, fraught with health and ready bounty.
4 O Indra marvellously bright, come, these libations long for thee,
5 Because thou, Agni, Jatavedas, stoodest at the world's head with thy refulgent splendour,
5 One of you Twain is Parent of all creatures, the otherjourneys onward all-beholding.
2 In heaven's first region, in the seat of Gods, is he who brings success,
Çanda and Marka together with N.N.', he should say of whom he hates; with him whom he hates he thus
e O Agni of kindly aspect, do thou with the All-gods
Bedew with fatness, Varuna nd Mitra ye Kings, make glad the pleasant dwelling-places.
Be friendly in the fray to those who offer the skin of beautiful and well-pressed Soma.
Roar out as thou art purified, run forward. Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
21 His leadings are with power and might and his instructions manifold:
5 So have I found and rescued thee thou hast returned with youth renewed.
8 Ne'er be my love from Indra disunited still may his liberal Milch-cow yield us treasure.
7. On a high car, O Parvata and Indra, bring pleasant viands, with brave heroes, hither!
Bring hither quick! On to the sage, ye Maruts! These prayers for you the singer hath recited.
7. O gold-coloured, lovely, fiery (plant), with hairy stem, thou art the sister of the waters, O lâkshâ, the wind
At whose behest the plants assume all colours, even thou Parjanya, yield us great protection.
(The cattle) whose structure of form Tvashtar knows, Savitar shall hold in place in this stable!
36. The sterile cow fulfils all wishes in the kingdom of Yama for him that gives her. But they say that hell falls to
4.6.70 Sukta 70 – Charm to secure the attachment of a Cow to her Calf
Give me a share in a thousand, with offspring, with cattle;
2 We will invoke strong, early-conquering Bhaga, the Son of Aditi, the great supporter:
Who was the bounteous man to whom their kindred rains flowed down with food of sacrifice?
Tortoises with the hooves; with the flesh of the hooves francolin
3. Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a prince among us, nobler than the noble.
gold; gold is a purifier; verily he purifies him; his food becomes fit to eat. The same (offering) he should
3 All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these, twice or thrice, are thine assistants.
Rousing all life she stirs all creatures that have feet, and makes the birds of air fly up.
3. O Soma Pavamana, thou flowest as Indra's gladdener: The men have seized and lead thee forth.
For he the Hero, gives the singer treasures: he is the Lord who sends us gifts, ye people.
3. Together, with one mighty deed, Indra and Agni, ye shook down.
8 Ye Bounteous Ones, from time of old we here set forth our brotherhood,
15 Vatsa the Rsi with his songs, Nasatyas, hath exalted you:
Stoma by the Trivrt, which is splendour; the Saptadaça by the Pañcadaça which is force and strength; the
wealthy. He puts down the life-giving (bricks); verily he bestows life upon him [2]. 'O Agni, thy highest
i Thou art mind, derived from Prajapati; with mind in true existence do thou enter me.
sun was born, thence the Bilva arose; verily he wins splendour with its place of origin. He who practises
4 He set thee in the earth's most lovely station, in Ila's place, in days of fair bright weather.
What time the priests with one united effort call him to aid, as sons invoke their father.
Even by the side of the sun it is bright [1],
Kissing the centre of the world together. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
b Thou art the strong, grasped by mind, acceptable to Visnu.
2. Thou art our father, Vata, yea, thou art our brother and our friend:
50. Bheda did not present the sterile cow, though requested by Indra: for this sin the gods crushed him in battle.
Who cherish in their heart abandonment of Gods. Brhaspati, no further rest shall they obtain.
thou art the replica of a thousand, thou art of a thousand, for a thousand thee!
Then hath the sacrifice good prayers and happy end, and heavenly gift of wealth to men.
He shines, all-knowing, with his lotty splendour: chasing black Night he comes with white-rayed
m Homage to you that hurl, and to you that pierce homage!
7 Pure, purifying is he called the Soma of the meath eflused,
8 I point not out to you a man who strikes the pious, or reviles:
2 Thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, and when the prize is staked:
cattle of the sacrificer. When they are leading northward the sacrificial animal over which the Apris
Graciously hear my hymns and invitations, marking, O Heroes, with your cars my longing.
the brick, he would obstruct the breath of cattle and of the sacrificer; he puts it down on the south side
3 Juice that this Stone pours out removes defect of ours, as in old time it brought prosperity to man.
Let those who often bring their solemn rites conquer the noisy babblers who present no gifts.
Yours, Varuna and Mitra, he surveyeth the worlds and living creatures like a herdsman.
6 Agni hath sat him down, a Priest most skilful, on a sweet-smelling place, his Mother's bosom.
1. Himself prosperous (bhûto), he does put strength into the beings (bhûteshu); he became the chief lord of the
connected with Manu; verily he makes them fit for food. 'Thou art the offering of mind', he says, to
Like a milch-cow, O Lords of splendour, and with haste let your benevolence come to us.
Ye by eternal Order govern all the world. Ye set the Sun in heaven as a refulgent car.
Fain to bring light to homes of men the noble and active Goddess hath emerged from darkness.
The accumulated practice of many past lives becomes the helpful breeze for spiritual progress. In this breeze, the yogis, continuing from past lives, hoist their sail in the form of sincere endeavor in the present life. Shree Krishna uses the words prayatnād yatamānastu, which means “striving harder than before.” The word tu indicates their present endeavor is deeper than in previous lifetimes when they were unsuccessful in completing the journey.They are thus able to take advantage of the momentum carried forward from the past and allow the favorable wind to sweep them to the goal. To onlookers, it may seem that they covered the entire distance in the present life, but Shree Krishna says: aneka janma sansiddhaḥ “Perfection in Yog is the result of the accumulated practice of many lives.”
Where is their spring, and where is their foundation? Where now, ye Waters, is your inmost centre?
We choose to us for the dear bond of friendship, most liberal Heroes bringing bliss like parents.
18 Purified in the bowl and gendering the hymn, wise Soma joys among the Gods.
5 Even the lofty heaven, O Jatavedas Vaisvanara, hath not attained thy greatness.
12. He that wears this talisman, verily is a tiger, a lion as well, and, too, a bull; moreover a curtailer of enemies.
9. The sorceries that come from the Angiras, the sorceries that come from the Asuras, the sorceries that prepare
The heaven itself attained not to thy greatness when with one hip of thine the earth was shadowed.
12 We make thee, Satakratu, find enjoyment in the songs we sing.
on birth is born with a threefold debt, of pupilship to the Rsis, of sacrifice to the gods, of offspring to the
19 O Indra, with these men who love thee truly, free givers, Maghavan, in every battle,
pressing. The Asuras sought to follow their sacrifice, but could not get on its tracks. They said, 'These
g Homage to him of the lake, and to him of the whirlpool.
Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by whom full many a work that brings reward is done.
2. The young darbha-grass burns (the serpents?), the tail of the horse, the tail of the shaggy one, the seat of the
2. His wealth who hath no store of kine hath ne'er found out recited laud,
2 Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of each germ unborn.
4.10.4 Sukta 4 – Charm against Serpents, invoking the Horse of Pedu that slays Serpents
Bestow upon us strength and wealth in thousands. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
sweetness' [4], he says in effect. He gives gold; gold is light; verily he places light before, to light up the
2 The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit: erst the Gandharva in the womb pronounced it:
These and ten lumps of gold have I received from Divodasa's hand.
Win us the waters of the sky, and send us kine abundantly.
Soma is pressed: thy gladdening draught, Indra! libation's Lord! is this.
13 This, this the Stones proclaim, what time they are disjoined, and when with ringing sounds they
2 Indra and Soma, let sin round the wicked boil like as a caldron set amid the flames of fire.
l The great I overcome [4] through kinship and my songs;
queen. May the sisters and brothers of your husband treat you as a queen.
The Lord of light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid with power and with the help he gives.
7. If any one for whatsoever purpose cuts her tail then do his colts die, and the wolf tears his calves.
power and strength of the sacrifice in sixteen ways; that became the Sodaçin; there is no sacrifice called
8 Whatever morsel we consume from waters or from plants of earth, O Soma, wax thou fat thereby.
causes strife among the deities. He should use Tristubh verses, appertaining to Agni, for the Yajyas and
8 Carefully cherished, Son of Strength, thou shoncst assuming lasting and refulgent beauties.
5. Harness, O Agni, O thou God, thy steeds which are most excellent!
7. The three-times seven milch-kine in the loftiest heaven have for this Soma poured the genuine milky draught.
supporteth the sacrifice; with lordly power men; with horse and car bearer of the bolt; lord with the
[5], one should not sit with her, nor eat her food, for she keeps emitting the colour of guilt. Or rather
Like a Seer lauding, famed among the folk; like a steed friendly he vouchsafes us power.
3 Mitali prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with Angiras' sons, Brhaspati with Rkvans:
He is the first: to him who fain would come to us all pathways turn; he is in truth the only one.
So let us serve this Soma with oblation, and rest securely in his grace and favour.
Elect us also into their assembly who by their calls on thee despoiled the niggards.
2. Partake of the ghee, of the sesame-oil, O Agni Gâtavedas, that standest on high, conquerest by thyself! Make
months, the fathers, make (me) bright; in the western quarter may the houses, the cattle, make (me)
Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds and keep their spirits ever pure and bright.
Make that, Adityas, Vasus, sons of Rudra, an evil brand to one allied with demons.
he deceives his foe. 'By sacrifice to the gods, Agni and Soma, may I be a slayer of foes', he says; by
17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her body in her guile and malice,
that which they have put into the dice, that do I hurl back again.
7. Those of you who were of yore unequalled in the deeds which they performed-may the), not injure here our
11 Yea, Hero, with the singers we sing.to the duly-coming Band.
He, like: a Sama-chanter utters both the notes, skilled in the mode of Trstup and of Gayatri.
14. Thou dost shelter Agni within, (and) the domestics together with the cattle. Thou that hast produced, art rich in
1. The spring-water yonder which runs down upon the mountain, that do I render healing for thee, in order that
of the Agnistoma Prajapati created off spring; by means of the Agnistoma he grasped them. When he
from prosperity him who being fit for prosperity does not obtain prosperity; verily he has recourse to the
life. You give us the love and protection of a father. You are our friend. You make us strong and
Thou by thy greatness art the Gods' High Priest, divine, far-spread unconquerable light.
8. That (kingdom) surely she swamps, as water a leaking ship; misfortune strikes that kingdom, in which they
9 I send sweet speech to Indra and to Agni: with hymns I speed it like a boat through waters.
18 When thou hast listened, make our call one which thou never wilt forget,
18. The honey that is in the mountains, in the heights; in the cows, and in the horses; the honey which is in the
Win thou the waters day by day, thralls of the strong.
a Let the ram aid thee with cooked food, the dark-necked with goats, the cotton-tree with increase, the
makes good his vow for him; he becomes a keeper of vows. To Agni, slayer of Raksases, he should offer
9 O Pavamana, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy to be famed,
10 The Heifer hath brought forth the Strong, the Mighty, the unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra.
9. May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit that lies in depth of waters!
5 So with my tongue I deck, to please that Indra, my hymn, as 'twere a horse, through love of glory,
Their shout of triumph heated earth and heaven. When the kine showed, they bade the heroes rouse
2 Soft to the tread, their sacred grass is scattered: these go like Kings amid the band around them,
indeed did he discern the seasons; in that (the cups) for the Maruts are drawn with the season-vessel,
2 Ours art thou, wondrous Agni, bywisdom and bounteousness of power.
r May we not [5], O strong one, in this distress,
4 Like mothers to their calves, like milch kine with their milk, so, Sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers
Thereafter as a gift to men, O Savitar, thou openest existence, life succeeding life.
as it were turned away. It makes up four, cattle are four-footed; verily he wins cattle. 'O Brahman, will
3 He, when the people deck him like a docile king of elephants.
She with the splendid chariot brings refulgence. The praise of Usas hath awoke the Asvins.
6 Smooth is your path, O Aryaman and Mitra; excellent is it, Varuna, and thornless.
20 Hear us the mouatains which distil the rain-drops, and, resting firm, rejoice in freshening moisture.
Brought by attendant priests pure juice is offered up, Vayu, pure juice is offered up.
He hath discovered even their hidden nature, the Cows' concealed and most mysterious title.
with its own deity he consumes the hot milk, for unity, for atonement.
1 In the beginning, there was neither existence nor non-existence. There was neither air nor space.
who desires offspring he should offer this oblation of beans to Prajapati verily he has recourse to
He, Bhrgu-like I hath gone as his companion, as on commission to a greater Sovran.
Krsnalas in weight; man has a hundred (years of) life, and a hundred powers; verily in life, in power [1]
For him the Ancient, Great, Strong, Energetic, the very mighty Wielder of the Thunder.
3. Tear asunder those (enemies), O asvattha (ficus religiosa), devour (khâda) them, O! khadira (acacia catechu)
So may the God attain the God, true Indu Indra who is true.
Here, too, the Ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, Shall give a son to him who cometh quickly.
Let him who rightly knoweth speak with homage to him who dealeth out man's noblest treasure.
1. Indu hath started forth for Indra's settled place, and slights not,. as a friend, the promise of his friend.
30 Lost is Alayya's axe. O Soma, God do thou send it back hither in thy flow
3 Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy; well-dressed, I fancy, is this recent present.
The steeds who carry them, as Gods and mortals know, have caused the waters of the mounuains to
Drink of the pleasant -flavoured juice the first draught is assigned to you.
d Homage to the hindmost, and to him in the depth.
7 Even from the sky thy brilliant lights shone hither: still hast thou beamed through many a radiant
Who visit sacred rites, whose tongue is Agni, Gods who made Manu stronger than the Dasyu.
Like a woman this bowstring twangeth stretched over the bow [1],
2 Whoso to thee, the Mighty, brings oblation, pure Soma unto thee, pure-drinking Vayu,
15 The limit of whose power not Gods by Godhead, nor mortal men have reached, nor yet the Waters.
three (verses) he draws a line around, Agni is threefold; verily from the whole extent of Agni he smites
Vouchsafe us room that we may win strength for prosperity and wealth.
6 For thee, O Blest Sarasvati, Vasistha hath here unbarred the doors d sacred Order.
3 A bard am I, my dad's a leech, mammy lays corn upon the stones.
a O god Savitr, instigate the sacrifice, instigate the lord of the sacrifice for good luck; may the divine
He that knoweth the seasons wherein he may satisfy the gods.
Rapid as thought, with fair backs, full of vigour, resplendent in their native light, O Asvins.
He offers to the kindling-sticks; verily he wins spring among the seasons. He offers to Tanunapat; verily
1. At the Trikadrukas the great and strong enjoyed the barley-brew. With Vishnu did he drink the
2 Agni hath waxen mighty by laudations, to be adored with hymns of those who praise him.
Come, dear to many, with the Lords who guard us well.
27. Bhava rules the sky, Bhava rules the earth; Bhava has filled the broad: atmosphere. Reverence be to him in
Conquer in battle, Agni, all those foemen, and light us every day with loving kindness.
Nasatyas, with your winged sterds came nigh, and gave him strength to win.
sound kikkita; at the sound kikkita the domestic animals stop, the wild run away. In that he offers with
born, and the latter born! The varana shall watch over thee!
possesses an oblation holder. He offers the Agnihotra morn and evening, he offers the new and the full
Under whose guard and heavenly light the Spotted seek the Mother's breast:
2 To thee with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds we come.
n O sky and earth protect me from this day to-day.
May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may they bury Death beneath this mountain.
4 He, with his might enhanced by Rsis thousandfold, hath like an ocean spread himself.
5 Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide, Preserver, righteous, and a Sage.
10 Graciously listen to our prayer, O Indra, and strength of varied sort bestow thou on us.
2 By Ordinance and Law ye dwell in peace secure, bestirring men.
2. O Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge us:
1. MAY the Milch-cows who hasten to their object come harmless unto us with liquid sweetness.
Greater are ye than rivers and than mountains, O Indra-Agni, and all things beside them.
I May I be victorious through the victory of Agni Svistakrt.
Magnify with these songs the never-vanquished, the Strong, the Bull of men, the Mighty Victor.
pairing. 'Thou art the mounter, thou art the descender', he says, for propagating. 'Thou art the wealthy,
7 Yoke to the firmly jointed car the ass which draws you, Lords of wealth.
says; verily he summons the gods in order. 'Bring hither the gods, O Agni; and sacrifice to them with a
art the vessel of Indra and Vayu. Brhaspati is the deity, Anustubh the metre, thou art the vessel of Mitra
8 They at whose racings forth the earth, like an age-weakened lord of men,
This hath preserved me from the fear of crossing: thus have I made my way o'er Rasa's waters.
9. Agni, Atharvan brought thee forth by rubbing from the sky, the head
7. Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify in speech
May we, who praise the strength of what is mighty, pass dangers, as with boats we cross the waters.
The juices of the juicy meet. Made pure by prayer, O Golden-hued, flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
Thither let Savitar the God transport thee, where dwell the pious who have passed-before thee.
food; therefore with the right (hand) is food eaten. 'Support, the twenty-onefold', (with these words he
4. Loudly I call that Indra Maghavan, the mighty, resistless, evermore possessing many glories.
And the arrow flieth from the arms of the strong men;
8 Three are the bright realms, best, beyond attainment, and three, the Asura's Heroes, rule as Sovrans,
6 O Usas, nobly-born, Daughter of Heaven, whom the Vasisthas with their hymns make mighty,
4. Indra and Agni, powers are yours, yours are oblations ano abodes: Good is your zealous energy.
2 Guardians infallible, eager as envoys' preserve us safe through many months and autumns.
No one who is not a Soma sacrificer should offer the Samnayya. For the milk of him who is not a Soma
follow man. There are three Sadahas, they make up eighteen days, nine and nine. Nine are the breaths in
These who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice, and by their Godhead drink the sweets of Soma juice.
Pray do not make us so infirm in our last years that we may need the paternal care of our children.
7. I with my praise have glorified strong Dadhikravan, conquering steed
Clothed in due season with the light of Surya, red, hath begot the sacrifice in person.
2. The earth is our mother, Aditi (the universe) our kin, the air our protector from hostile schemes. May father sky
9. Filled full of fatness, compassing all things that be, wide, spacious, dropping meath, beautiful in their
Ye, knowing e'en his name, have told it forth: may we, Visnu, enjoy the grace of thee the Mighty One.
Now for the fire which is produced on the fire-altar and for Soma, the king, the beast for Agni and Soma
Then shall the prudent and discerning Agni worship the Gods, best worshipper, in season.
pours on what has fire, the Adhvaryu does not become blind, the Raksases do not destroy the sacrifice. 'I
1.2.36 Mantra 36 – Various Deities (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada
3. The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who runs his circling course with many round
1. THE Cow, the famous Mother of the wealthy Maruts, pours her milk:
Aryaman save us us all those who hate us: give room and freedom to Sudas, ye Mighty.
38 Back, forward goes he, grasped by strength inherent, the Immortal born the brother of the mortal
He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild mighty buffalo.
Some in the Svaha call, some in the Svadha rejoice [5].
together with the goddesses shall enter; settle down to this (porridge) in proper order, and cat it!
12 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra whom we must adore,
May days with bright dawns cause my songs to prosper, and may the conquered streams increase their
6 And hear, O Maghavan; to him who craves of thee thou grantest all
it the full moon has Indra. There are curds for Indra at the new moon; verily the new moon has Indra. He
His kine most excellent, of threefold nature, pass swiftly round the boundaries of heaven.
he desire of a man, 'May he be richer', he should gather for him with both sets; verily upon him he
head; in that (he offers) to Indra, the powerful, he thereby makes his body; in that (he offers) to Indra of
waters; therefore waters draw the fire; verily they enter their own birthplace.
14. Chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, Soma floweth on, going to Indra's settled place.
5. Evil be to him that prepares evil, the curse shall recoil upon him that utters curses: back do we hurl it against
We, having drunk of meath, will reach his seat whose Friends are three times seven.
9 Guard us from him who would assail us, Agni; preserve us O thou Victor, from dishonour.
9 May Herald Agni, fulgent, bring for worship Tvastar adored, in homes and swift to listen,
For ye have lore and wisdom and poetic skill: as such, with this our prayer we call on you to come.
pressings; he would bestow brilliance upon himself at the morning pressing, power at the midday
2 At high solemnities mortal men glorify him the Immortal, best
Dyutana Maruta, with the Maruts, protect thee on the north [4]; may the gods, whose chief is Indra,
about a Global Dharmic Renaissance that will leave no nation untouched. The world needs a more
1. Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demons, driving off our foemen!
So may we under his supreme protection, safe in his arms, succeed in each forth-going.
Vaiçvanara; (the year) which he yokes he lets go with its own share, for support; the rope with which he
By the thousandth the sacrifice goes to the world of heaven. She makes him go to the world of heaven.
3 Hero, when thou art fain to give, neither may Gods nor mortal men
verily thereby he makes (it) for the gods; 'Homage', he says; verily thereby he makes (it) for the Pitrs; so
2 The Sapient One arrays himself in every form: for quadruped and biped he hath brought forth good.
2. As the earth is dead in spirit, in spirit more dead than the dead, and as the spirit of him that has died, thus shall
Gandharva in the floods, the Dame of Waters-such is our bond, such our most lofty kinship.
1 THE other fires are, verily, thy branches; the Immortals all rejoice in thee, O Agni.
12 Avoid us thou whose flight is straight, and let our bodies be as stone.
the Sadas share in it; with a garment he ties it up; the garment is connected with all the gods [6]; verily
sacrificial gift; verily taking the self as the gift they go to the world of heaven. They cut off the top-knot,
says. Mitra is the auspicious one of the gods; verily with his help he binds her by the foot. 'May Pusan
pure, thereby he bestows sight upon him [3]; even if he is blind, he yet sees. He who desires offspring
established in the Upançu (cup), and they established it in the Upançu. The Asuras grasping the
The man whom Indra and the Marut host defend comes to a stable full of kine.
Kutsa the son of Arjuni I master. I am the sapient Usana behold me.
7 The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us, and with its feet cuts through the path it
t Measured and commensurate, to aid us, harmonious, at this sacrifice, O Maruts.
happiness be superior to all our equals! I bend down under our feet all those that hate us.
7. Here, ye waters, is your heart, here is your calf, ye righteous ones! Come ye, mighty ones, by this way here, by
Ye [3] whose might among the gods, O gods, is unextinguished,
(with these words he puts down) on the south; the surface of the tawny one is yonder sun; verily he
at the new or the full moon omits, for the new and full moon offerings are made for the world of heaven;
these deities may I be propagated with a pair.' 'Thou art the bundle, thou art gain, may I gain', he says;
deities are the breaths, the Ida is cattle; if he should summon the Ida before those that are for two deities
1. SLAYERS of enemies, Indra and Agni, accept this day our new-born pure laudation.
6 Eager for spoil was Turvasa Purodas, fain to win wealth, like fishes urged by hunger.
The three kinds of rewards that the soul reaps after death are: 1) iṣhṭam, or pleasant experiences in the celestial abodes, 2) aniṣhṭam, or unpleasant experiences in the hellish abodes, and 3) miśhram, or mixed experiences in the human form on the earth planet. Those who perform virtuous actions are awarded the celestial realms; those who perform unrighteous actions are given birth in the nether realms; and those who perform a mixture of both come back to the human realm. But this applies only when the actions are performed with a desire for rewards. When such fruitive desire is renounced and work is done merely as a duty to God, then no such results accrue from actions.A similar rule exists in the world as well. If one person kills another it is considered murder, which is a crime that can even result in the death sentence. However, if the government declares that someone is a notorious murderer or thief who is wanted dead or alive, then killing such a person is not considered an offence in the eyes of the law. Instead, it is rewarded by the government, and the killer is even respected as a national hero. Similarly, when we give up personal motive in our actions, then the three-fold fruits of actions do not accrue.
Opulent, with imperial sway like heroes, favour your servant and this day enrich him.
7 Set Agni Jatavedas down, the bearer of our sacred gifts,
16 Cleansed by the pressers, armed with noble weapons, stream to us the fair secret name thou
4 He will in very truth ascend the powerful car that finds the kine,
5 Yea, verily, our princes seek the Asvins in pursuit of food.
8 Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the Deity's Parents, have made Brhaspati increase in grandeur.
3 One priest announces what the institutor gives: one, altering the forms, zealously plies his task,
23. Rich in honey becomes he, rich in honey become his appurtenances, worlds rich in honey does he win, he
4 May Indra evermore be gracious unto us, and may King Soma meditate our happiness,
When wilt thou make us glorious? Make this, only this thine end and aim. Now, Indra! yoke thy two bay steeds.
These our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meath: dvink thereof and find them pleasant.
Approach to drink the Soma, come, drink in the worshipper's abode.
Blest be the fixing of the sacred Pillars, blest be the tender Grass and blest the Altar.
In whose wild joy thou stirrest up the people, in whose wild joy thou didst unbar the cow-stalls.
All-gods, common to all men, fashion thee with the Anustubh metre, in the manner of Angiras. Thou art
3. I pray to Agni--may he hear!--the Hotar with sweet tones, the Priest,
For Indra, who is Lord of old, the singers have decked their lauds with heart and mind and spirit.
When to the people of the home he cometh he strideth to the sacrifice, the Holy.
6 Thus do they magnify me, me the mighty higher than even high heaven is my car-pole.
2 Waters which come from heaven, or those that wander dug from the earth, or flowing free by nature,
O most admired for greatness of thy majesty, God, by thy greatness thou art great!
Fraught with great bounties, meet for praise and glory; vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
1. ADHVARYU, on the filter pour the Soma juice expressed with stones,
He shines, observant, with his lofty splendour; chasing black night he comes with white-rayed morning.
8 To every draught of pressed-out juice Indra, the Vrtra-slayer, comes,
Preserve the singers and our liberal princes, and make us wealthy with abundant riches.
art taken with a support; thou art Samsarpa; to Anhaspatya thee!' he says; 'There is a thirteenth month',
His truth is the delight that in this chamber the men of old and recent times have tasted.
2. Hither may they who wake at dawn bring, to drink Soma, both the Gods,
52 Pour forth this wealth with this purification: flow onward to the yellow lake, O Indu.
8 Bring us, O Daughter of the Sky, subsistence in our herds of kine,
Prajapati; verily he confers upon himself mind and the sacrifice. 'Thou art speech, derived from Indra,
Thou, kindly giving Raji to Pithinas, slewest with might, at once, the sixty thousand.
f They call the altar-ground the furthest end of the earth.
Give us good paths for travel: guard us ivell at home.
2 Discerning, have they offered gifts: they guard the strength that never wastes.
Him who wins thousands at the worship of the Gods, himself, that Agni, serve with son s.
the Yajya, and thus the blessing of the sacrifice falls to them equally. Even as Parjanya rains down good
9 Tvastar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic art, bringing most blessed bowls that hold the drink
d Sit thou on the smooth, sit thou on the pleasant seat.
To Sun and Moon, two Moons, to Yama in the heaven, to Trita, Vata, Dawn, Night, and the Atvins
behind, as (the hunter) that follows the trail of a wounded (animal).
Hero, to whom the prayer is brought, we praise thee as great for that wherein we know thee mighty.
10. To meet your treasure-bringing car, the mighty car most dear to us.
When, glowing, O Vaisvanara, for Puru, thou Agni didst light up and rend their castles.
8 Our fathers then were these, the Seven his, what time the son of Durgaha was captive.
17 Indra, whom Tawny Coursers bear, praise such as thine, preeminent,
oblation; then indeed the gods agreed to recognize Indra's pre-eminence. Him who is mutually at
Indra was on a level with the gods, he was not distinguished from them. He ran up to Prajapati; he gave
What is our best course in this secret passage: we, unreproached, have reached a t)lace far distant.
Dabhiti lit the flame for thee, and worshipped with fuel, hymns, poured Soma, dressed oblations.
3 Indra and Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the Waters, Mountains, Maruts, Sky, and Earth and Heaven,
When in the rapture of the Soma he unclosed with strength the solid firm-shut stables of the kine.
36 Agni was born the first of all, like Surya lovely with his light:
17 Pusan, I long to win thy love, I long to praise thee, Radiant God.
naturally perforated brick (a ladle) of Udumbara wood filled with curds; curds are strength, the
2. O bowstring, turn aside from us, turn my body into stone! Do thou firmly hold very far away the hostile powers
k Thou art the portion of the Rbhus, the overlordship, of the All-gods, being calmed and saved, the
Bring thou the Marut host. Ye men do worship to Indra seated on the grass, eternal.
to rain. 'Stay, O Maruts, the speeding falcon', (with these words) he pushes back the west wind; verily he
What time the sacrificer's thoughts speed on his way the Golden-hued.
Be to us a protection even from far away Lords of great wealth, with many aids.'
7 The Gods whose tongue is Agni dwell in heaven, and sit, aiders of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law.
14. The water with which they bathe the dead, with which they moisten his beard, that very one, O oppressor of
makes the people of one mind with him; 'Come hither, O ye Maruts [2] rich in dew, with this lord of the
2. To glory goest thou, Sage with disposing skill, like a groomed steed thou rusbest forward to the prize.
46 O Bride! May your father-in-law treat you as a queen. May your mother-in-law treat you as a
Thou a wild elephant with might invested. like a dread lion as thou wieldest weapons.
Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Brhaspati gathered to himself the cattle,
Now drink thou with the wealth-bestowing Rbhus, whom for their skill thou madest friends, O Indra.
1. IN perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the light of heaven have sung forth Indra's
5. Pray Agni of the piercing flame, with sacred songs, to be our help;
1. WITH hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Rbhus' mighty deeds.
waters strive to drag away his fire, verily it remains unmoved. He puts down the Aditya bricks; it is the
perishes. The sprinkling is the head of the sacrifice, the ladle is the body [7]. Having sprinkled, he
Easily, for Sudis, like grass didst rend them, and out of need, King, broughtest gain to Puru.
sacrifice [2], if they eat in the middle. They purify it with water; all the gods are the waters; verily they
should say, 'Set out! In speech the sacrifice is placed; where the sacrifice is placed, thence does he
13 The Gods have come to Indu well-descended, beautified with milk,
a O Agni, brilliant, be thou brilliant among the gods; make me brilliant, of long life, radiant among men;
Born of the waters, born of the cows, born of holy order, born of the mountain, the great holy order.
All Indra's enemies were slain and passed away like froth and foam.
The theologians say, 'Should the Soma be clarified or not?' Soma indeed is the king of plants; whatever
Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your lauds repeatedly!
To the moon he made obeisance, to the Naksatras he made obeisance; as the moon with the Naksatras
Falcon amid the vultures, axe of forests, over the cleansing sieve goes Soma singing.
13 Thy guardian rays, O Agni, when they saw him, preserved blind Mamateya from affliction.
To Agni he offers on eight potsherds; the sacrificial fee is gold. To Indra (he offers) on eleven potsherds;
Accepting his fair praises with approval, ye gave his eyes again to blinded Kanva.
Trayastrinça (Stoma), the Raivata (Saman), the cool (season), (offering is made) on twelve potsherds. To
7 Yea, let the Asvins Twain he gracious unto us, even Rudras, and all Gods, Bhaga, Rathaspati;
1. The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is distined,
14 Resistless from of old through hero courage, thou hast done all these many acts, O Indra.
With twenty-one beans he approaches the head of the man; beans are impure, the man's head is impure;
Those who regard not Varuna's commandments and the dear stedfast laws of sapient Mitra.
n Thou art the ashes of Agni; thou art the rubble of Agni.
1. HE who, as Sovran Lord of men, moves with his chariots unrestrained,
1. WITH sacrifice exalt Agni who knows all life; worship him 'with oblation and the song of praise,
2. Strong is the red Bird in his strength, great hero, who from of old bath had no nest to dwell in.
Bow down before the Rsis of the ancient times, who made this path in days of old.
offspring. 'Thou art holy order, truth by name', he says; verily he wins lordly power. 'Thou art the past,
strength; verily he gives him strength. 'May the All-gods thee', he says; the All-gods are the breaths;
behind and are brought forth in front. In accordance with the Çukra and Manthin are offspring born, the
7 Slavelike may I do service to the Bounteous, serve, free from sin, the God inclined to anger.
What brings thee forth is even this. Now come, Subandhu, get thee forth.
Compass this house to keep it from the foeman, that none may force it, either near or distant.
Him, Indra, fill with Soma as a garner is filled with barley full: be this your labour.
8 Lords of great wealth, when we invoke your bounty which no demon checks,
setting down; verily with the Brahman he surrounds the year on both sides. He who is undertaking the
here I have measured with cups; measured was the grain, so as to be according to these regulations.
3 When fair bright days shall dawn on us, O Indra, and thou shalt bring thy banner near in battle,
4 Even for him I frame a laud, as fashions the wright a chariot for the man who needs it,Praises to him who gladly hears our praises, a hymn well-formed, all-moving, to wise Indra.
For ye are they who give us store of riches: ye guard your gift uncheated by the bounteous.
In strength like Soma, guard of the Five Peoples, may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
10 Urged like a car-steed flow to strength, O Soma: Indu, flow onward to the throat of Indra.
9 To you in praise of sweetness sang the honey-bee: Ausija calleth you in Soma's rapturous joy.
been rendered impotent. The mountain that grows poisonous plants has been rendered impotent.
God is all-pure, and whatever he does also becomes pure and auspicious. The Ramayan states:samaratha kahuñ nahiṅ doṣhu gosāīṅ, rabi pāvaka surasari kī nāīṅ. [v15]“Pure personalities are never tainted by defects even in contact with impure situations and entities, like the sun, the fire, and the Ganges.” The sun does not get tainted if sunlight falls on a puddle of urine. The sun retains its purity, while also purifying the dirty puddle. Similarly, if we offer impure objects into the fire, it still retains its purity—the fire is pure, and whatever we pour into it also gets purified. In the same manner, numerous gutters of rainwater merge into the holy Ganges, but this does not make the Ganges a gutter—the Ganges is pure and in transforms all those dirty gutters into the holy Ganges. Likewise, God is not tainted by the activities he performs.Activities bind one in karmic reactions when they are performed with the mentality of enjoying the results. However, God’s actions are not motivated by selfishness; his every act is driven by compassion for the souls. Therefore, although he administers the world directly or indirectly, and engages in all kinds of activities in the process, he is never tainted by any reactions. Lord Krishna states here that he is transcendental to the fruitive reactions of work.Even Saints who are situated in God-consciousness become transcendental to the material energy. Since all their activities are effectuated in love for God, such pure-hearted Saints are not bound by the fruitive reactions of work. The Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam states:yat pāda paṅkaja parāga niṣheva tṛiptāyoga prabhāva vidhutākhila karma bandhāḥsvairaṁ charanti munayo ’pi na nahyamānāstasyechchhayātta vapuṣhaḥ kuta eva bandhaḥ(10.33.35) [v16]“Material activities never taint the devotees of God who are fully satisfied in serving the dust of his lotus feet. Nor do material activities taint those wise sages who have freed themselves from the bondage of fruitive reactions by the power of Yog. So where is the question of bondage for the Lord himself who assumes his transcendental form according to his own sweet will?”
7 Him, too, who threatens us without offence of ours, the evilminded, arrogant, rapacious man,Him turn thou from our path away, Brhaspati: give us fair access to this banquet of the Gods.
3. Flow onward like the potent band of Maruts, like that celestial host which none revileth!
5 Thou art the Eye and Guard of mighty Order, and Varuna when to sacrifice thou comest.
6 Thus hath Vasistha praised victorious Agni, yearning for wealth that giveth all subsistence.
When with pure hands the prudent energetic priest hath with the stones pressed out the Soma rich in
8. Reverence be to thee, O Prâna, when thou breatbest in (primate), reverence when thou breathest out!
Adityas thee! Quicken the Adityas. Thou art force; for the Pitrs thee! Quicken the Pitrs. Thou art the
36 Seven germs unripened yet are heaven's prolific, seed: their functions they maintain by Visnu's
13 Meet to be lauded and adored, showing in beauty through the dark,
Savitar sends, before the dawn of day, your car, fraught with oil, various-coloured, to our sacrifice.
we from men', he says in effect. 'Here is the path of favour, and this our homage to the gods', he says; to
Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself: be for our profit as the Master of the wise.
Which ministering priest is called eighth Hero? Who then hath tracked the two Bay Steeds of Indra?
and lays him low. He who piles the fire is consecrated; these are the offerings of the divine consecrators;
5 Membrum suum virile, quod vrotentum fuerat, mas ille retraxit. Rursus illud quod in juvenem filiam
Let the fools' gods with bent necks fall and perish, and see no more the Sun when he arises.
12 Brave Indra, let it work through both thy flanks, and through thy head by prayer,
29, This amulet the gods shall give me unto prosperity, the mighty amulet that strengthens sovereignty and injures
34 Fain to be cleansed, thou, Pavamana, pourest out, like wondrous Surya, through the fleece, an
7. Hither to this (house) hath come the tender child, hither the calf along with (the other) domestic animals; hither
Agni, Most Youthful God, protect the singer: win us by worship, Agni, great possessions.
12 O thou of mighty acts, the aids that are in thee call forward many an eager hope.
Maruts a dappled heifer. To the Açvins and Pusan he offers a cake on twelve potsherds; to Sarasvati of
Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every side. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
11 One of my flanks is in the sky; I let the other trail below:
20 Ye, Wonder-Workers, filled with milk for Sayu the milkless cow, emaciated, barren;
from the foundation of the Fathers, a remover of diseases produced by the winds (of the body).
6 O Agni, God with Mitra's might call hither the favour of the Gods from earth and heaven.
d (May) the Brhat Saman, which supporteth kingly power, with vast strength,
prospers with the prosperity with which Manu prospered. From what is unsupported in the sacrifice the
tenth day, the Avivakya, produces overmuch. Those who are outside as spectators [2] should point out
Therewith hath Mudgala in ordered contest won for cattle for himself, a hundred thousand.
Maghavan with his puissance struck down Ahi, rent Rauhipa to death and slaughtered Vyarnsa.
season', six times he says,' the seasons are six; verily he delights the seasons; 'For the seasons', four
2. The Sun ascending, the refulgent star, pours down his beams. together with the Dawn.
Quicken rain', he says; verily he wins rain [2]. 'Thou art blowing forward; thou art blowing after', he
5 Agni, the tawny horses, loudly neighing our resonant hymns that drop with oil, attend thee;
Whom, passing wise, Gods, Heaven and Earth, engendered, formed by a Master's hand, to crush the
Lauded of all who saw, praying for what is best, desiring glorious fame among Immortal Gods.
Shree Krishna explains that beyond the eight-fold prakṛiti, the material energy, which He says is inferior; there exists another that is far more superior. This energy is completely transcendental as compared to the lifeless matter. It is His spiritual energy, the jīva śhakti, which includes all the living souls of the world. Now, He has moved from explaining material science toward the spiritual realm.Many great philosophers of India have given their perspectives and described the relationship between God and the jīva, the individual soul. For example, the non-dualists state: jīvo brahmaiva nāparaḥ “The soul itself is God.” But this concept gives rise to several questions, such as:How can thesoul itself be God? God is most powerful, and Maya is His subservient energy. The souls are always overpowered by; Maya. Then is Maya stronger than God?The individual soul is always; gripped by ignorance and misery. It needs a continuous reminder from the saints and scriptures, even about its existence and purpose. How can God, who is all-knowing, be considered a soul which is subject to ignorance?The Vedas repeatedly state that God is all-pervading in this world and beyond. Similarly, individual souls should also be able to exist anywhere at any given time. Then what about the question of going to heaven or hell after death?There is only one God, but the souls are countless. If the soul itself is God, then there should be many Gods. Therefore, the claims by non-dualistic philosophers that the soul itself is God are inconclusive.The dualist philosophers’ state that the souls and God are separate. Even though it may answer some of the above questions, yet it is still an incomplete philosophy in light of what Shree Krishna states in this verse. He says that the soul is a part of jīva śhakti God’s spiritual energy. And as explained earlier, Maya, the material energy, is also His subservient. Thus, God is supreme; He is the governor of both the lower material and the higher spiritual energies.Now let us see what the scriptures and various saints have said:eka-deśha-sthitasyāgnir jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathāparasya brahmaṇaḥ śhaktis tathedam akhilaṁ jagat (Viṣhṇu Purāṇ 1.22.53)“Just as the sun resides in one place but its sunlight pervades; the entire solar system. Similarly, there is one God, who by His infinite powers pervades the three worlds.”Chaitanya Mahaprabhu said: jīva-tattva śhakti, kṛiṣhṇa-tattva śhaktimāngītā-viṣhṇupurāṇādi tāhāte pramāṇa (Chaitanya Charitāmṛit, Ādi Leela, 7.117)“The soul is the energy of God, while He is the Supreme Energetic.”Once we understand and accept that the soul is a small part of God’s infinite energy, the concept of non-duality of the entire creation becomes clear. Energies can exist concurrently within the same energetic. For example, fire contains both heat and light, which are different entities and have different properties. But they are part of the same fire which emits them. Likewise, God as the Energetic and the souls His energy can be considered one. At the same time, due to their distinct properties, both entities are different from each other.Jagadguru Kripaluji Maharaj has encapsulated and perfectly expressed Shree Krishna’s statement in this and the previous verse:jīvu’ ‘māyā’, dui śhakti haiñ, śhaktimān bhagavānśhaktihiñ bheda abheda bhī, śhaktimān te jān (Bhakti Śhatak verse 42)“The soul and Maya are both energies of God. Hence, they are both one with God and also different from God.”Considering the unison of both; the Energetic and His energies, it is stated that God and His creation are non-different. The entire world is a veritable form of God.sarvaṁ khalvidaṁ brahma (Chhāndogya Upaniṣhad 3.14.1)“All is Brahman.”īśhāvāsyam idam sarvaṁ (Īśhopaniṣhad 1)“Everything that exists in the world is God.”puruṣha evedaṁ sarvaṁ (Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad 3.15)“The Supreme Divine Personality is everything that exists.”According to these Vedic verses, there is only one God and nothing else. Yet, when we consider the Energetic and energy concept, there is diversity within this unity and an incredible variety. God, the souls, and matter, all three are different entities with different properties. God is Supremely sentient; He is the source of both the souls and the matter. Yet, souls are sentient, and the matter insentient.The scriptures also state the existence of three entities in creation:kṣharaṁ pradhānamamṛitākṣharaṁ haraḥkṣharātmānāvīśhate deva ekaḥtasyābhidhyānād yojanāt tattvabhāvadbhūyaśhchānte viśhwamāyānivṛittiḥ(Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad 1.10)“There are three entities in existence: 1) Matter, which is perishable. 2) The individual souls who are imperishable. 3) God, who is the controller of both matter and the souls. By meditating upon God, uniting with Him, and becoming more like Him, the soul is free from the world’s illusion.”The Vedas have expounded on both dualistic and non-dualistic concepts. Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj has upheld the concepts of concurrent coherence, yet variance between the soul and God. This means God and the soul are one; yet, separate from each other.
good is the fire piled?' they say. 'May I be rich in cattle', (with this hope) is the fire [2] piled; verily he
Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce fight with heroes, strengthening his powers.
What bard, accepters of the bard? Who, rich in wealth! with sacrifice?
1. That which has caused thee to miscarry do we drive away from thee, that very thing do we deposit outside of
c Homage to the giver of weal, and to the lord of cattle.
6 To see the Indraless oblation-drinkers, mean offerers, o'ertaken by destruction!
3 The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be Dasa or be Arya, who would war with us,Easy to conquer he for thee, with us, these foes: with thee may we subdue them in the clash of fight.
a Thou I art connected with the Maruts, thou art the force of the Maruts, cleave the stream of the waters.
4. He who fastens what is firm, the strong, the leader, the brahma, the ten creators of the all, the divinities, are
Let my fair hymns of praise cause thee to wax great;
30. Stir up (the grains) as they settle at the bottom: let them mingle their inmost parts with the waters! The water
d O invincible ones, swell with the share for the gods,
15 That Hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both worlds apart,
3 What now? As prompter of the poor thou helpest him who sheds the juice.
is a dwarf beast of burden. To Agni and Soma he offers on eleven potsherds, to Indra and Soma on
c Thou art the portion of them that gaze on men, the overlordship of Dhatr, the birthplace saved, the
14 The Mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty Goddesses, worthy of sacrifice, ecune with the race
2 Sage, Sing, Food, Light,-they bring him from the mountain, the blessed Sovran of the earth and
serve as the price of Soma, he would not have purchased the Soma, and they would not guard the Sonia
verily he bestows food on him in the middle; therefore in the middle is food eaten. It is offered to
9 O God Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us a place among wealthy princes.
k Homage to him of the copse, and to him of the grass [1].
The spiritual realm has a divine sky called the Paravyom, where all the different forms of God have their eternal abodes called the Lokas. The Supreme Lord resides in His various divine forms in these Lokas along with His eternal associates. Golok is the divine abode of Lord Krishna, Saket Lok is the abode of Lord Ram, Vaikunth Lok is the abode of Lord Vishnu, Shiv Lok is the abode of Lord Shiv, Devi Lok is the abode of Divine Mother Durga, etc. These divine forms are non-different from the Supreme Lord; they are all divine forms of the same one God. A devotee may worship any of the forms of God and strive to attain Him. Once God-realized, their soul will reach the divine Lok of that form of God and remain there forever. It receives a divine body and participates in the divine pastimes and activities of the Lord.
11 & 12 & 14 Lord, we seek your blessings. May you as Ashvins bless us;
Even as thou drankest, Indra, earlier Somas, so drink to-day, a new guest, meet for praises.
Will sacrifice to the gods for us, most skilled to win prosperity by sacrifice;
and greatness. 'Thou art the breath of the Açvins', he says; the Açvins are the physicians of the gods [2];
were he rains; verily he unites him with his hue, to win the rains.
1. ADVANCING, sending forth her rays, the Daughter of the Sky is seen.
sacrificer', he would produce an enemy for him [3].2 'Bring hither the gods to the sacrificer', he says;
He offers the Avabhrthayajuses; whatever sin he has committed in the year before, verily that thereby he
Be, for our weal, our friend and sharer of the feast, and let thy wisdom guard us well!
That thou with power dost slay Vrtra, O Lord of Strength.
Strong in thy deeds, checking assault, Lord, Mightiest Indra, of the brave!
g O thou in whom joy is taken, may I attain joy from thee; O thou who art invoked, may I obtain
Proclaim me among the gods as a doer of good deeds.'
1. SWIFT Soma drops have been effused in streams of meath, the gladdening drink,
3 All Universal Deities, the Maruts, all the Adityas, yea, and all the Rbhus,
in man are nine, the navel is the tenth; verily he places the breaths in front; therefore the breaths are in
4.2.29 Sukta 29 – Charm for obtaining Long Life and Prosperity by Transmission of Disease
16. With that triple-armoured powerful covering of thine, O Kâma, with the charm that has been made into an
the Gayatri; verily on the east he establishes the beginning of the sacrifice. 'The embryo, the twentyfivefold', (with these words he puts down) on the south; embryos are food, the twenty-fivefold is food;
10 Yea, Strong One! Tvastar turned for thee, the Mighty, the bolt with thousand spikes and hundred
3 Agni! the hero slays with might his foeman; the singer bears away the Pani's bootyEven he whom thou, Sage, born in Law, incitest by wealth, accordant with the Child of Waters.
19 Come hither swift with gifts of wealth - be not thou angry with us-like
to the gods, full of sweetness; enter the giver', he says; 'we here are givers; do ye there enter us, full of
2 May Mitra bear us oer distress, and Varuna and Aryaman,
He even now hath yoked his vigorous Bay Steeds: the Vrtra-slayer hath come near.
1. SING like the two press-stones for this same purpose; come like two misers to the tree of treasure;
here; why is hospitality offered to Soma and not to Agni?' In that having kindled fire he places it on the
regional (bricks), they put them down, and by them they made firm the quarters; in that he put down the
sixty, a thousand, ten thousand unperishing; ye are standing on holy order, increasing holy order,
When gathered round about thee, Agni, lie the herds where thou art kindled in the morn.
Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then shall glorious men in troops adore thee.
4 Bhujyu ye bore with winged things, Nasatyas, which for three nights, three days full swiftly travelled,
3. When the teacher receives the Brahmakârin as a disciple, he places him as a foetus inside (of his body). He
8 Indra increased his manly strength at sacrifice, in the wild rapture of this juice.
Agni sprang into being, magnifying both his Parents, Heaven and Earth, rich in prolific seed.
5. The thief that approacheth to-day, crushed to pieces he goeth away. Where the paths are precipitate he shall
months; verily he delights the year, verily also he endows him with the year, for the gaining of the world
24. The amulet . . . has come to me together with rice and barley, together with might and prosperity.
the north; therefore he that advances to the north is victorious. 'Speed, the eighteenfold', (with these
his cattle would be likely to wander from him; he takes them standing against the stream; verily he
Sarama found the cattle's firm-built prison whereby the race of man is still supported.
29 Driving the Raksasas afar, O Soma, bellowing, pour for us
down the heads of animals, the sacrificer breathes with them in yonder world; verily also these worlds
When we declare amid the congregation the virtues of the strong Steed, God-descended.
15 Bringing all life-sustaining blessings with her, showing herself she sends forth brilliant lustre.
7. O Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons
He whom both Heaven anct Earth exalt and strengthenwhom, Giver of all boons, the Hotar worships.
While days and nights go to the world of spirits, here let the Parents with sweet meath refresh us
Asuras do I, O Brihaspati, annihilate yonder army: I smite the enemies with force.
1. Loud neighs the Tawny Steed when started, settling deep in the wooden vessel while they cleanse
3 I have attained the most maternal River, we have approached Vipas, the broad, the blessed.
Through these our Soma-draughts and those who press, to give, drinker of pure bright Soma Juice.
When, rich with Soma juice, Stones of the mountain, ye, united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise.
vyadvaras (' rodents') of the forest, and whatever other vyadvaras (there are), all these we do crush.
north [4]; therefore the left hand is most to be maintained. 'Inspiration, the thirty-onefold', (with these
Prajapati created the gods and the Asuras; thereafter the sacrifice was created, after the sacrifice the
i With fair abode, fair wealth, doer of good deeds, holding the light, Parjanya. is the Gandharva; his
May the foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, like a tree's ripe fruit, sixty thousand treasures!
11 Him, Agni, thou deliverest and savest who brings him prayer to thee the Wise, O Hero,
3. For, Vritra-slayer, thou art he who drinks these drops of Soma come
is a fierce devourer of the Kanvas: her, the mighty, have I employed.
g Homage to him of the stream,' and to him of the way.
3 The fire is kindled, Soma pressed, O Indra: let thy Bays, best to draw, convey thee hither.
Beyond this realm there is another glory so through old age they pass and feel no sorrow.
8 O Agni, highly lauded, make our singer famous that he may win us store of riches:
(Saman) in the world of heaven. They surrounded it from above with the Para (Samans), and with the
3. O Jatavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our fair hymns and songs!
49. Thy forest animals, the wild animals homed in the woods, the man-eating lions, and tigers that roam; the ula,
sacrifices in the southern fire; verily he does not mingle the breaths. Some of the altars are besprinkled,
5. I laud your most beloved guest like a dear friend, O Agni, him
sacrificer is the divine Tvastr. He pays reverence with many (verses); verily he makes many
be thine alone.' 'He shall prosper', he said, who shall establish the fire with me as its divinity.' Pusan
High Brahman dignity be yours, Angirases. Welcome the son of Manu, ye who are most wise.
For twenty-four nights should he be consecrated; the year has twenty-four half-months; the Viraj is the
1) That we may earn glory, and 2) That we may gain immortality through an unbroken line of
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn heie.
8.Like women at a gathering fair to look on and gently smiling, they incline to Agni.
6 Thou, who hast thunder for thy weapon, with thy bolt hast shattered into pieces this broad massive
14 The reverent or unwearied man whose holy labour he accepts,
7. The bone of the gods turned into pearl; that, animated, dwells in the waters. That do I fasten upon thee unto
Thou, Indra, laying the great mountain open, slaying the Danava, didst loose the torrents.
one (verse) he would make (it) a ladle offering; having pronounced the Puronuvakya he offers with the
3. The store of Amrit that laid away yonder, O Vata, in thine home-Give us strength that we may live!
18. Frighten thou, O Arbudi, yonder lines of the enemy; the conquering and the victorious (Arbudi and Nyarbudi),
the mouth of the sacrifice, and sacrifices with the second. Verily one wins the gods with the first, power
6 Forth comes your strong Bull like a cloud of autumn, sending abundant food of liquid sweetness.
I. MAY Savitar the God, O Stones, stir you according to the Law:
8 Her, Sinivali, her, Gungu, her, Raka, her, Sarasvati, Indrani to mine aid I call, and Vartunani for my
ascend thou, and immortality ascend thou, unite thy body with Rohita!
3 Whom, as 'twere down a precipice, swift rushing, each Puru praises and his heart rejoices,Springing forth like a hero fain for battle, whirling the car and flying like the tempest.
7 When the Dawns come attendant upon Surya their rays discover wealth of divers colours.
2. Slayer of Vritra, mount thy car! The bay steeds have been yoked by prayer.
Inviting those we long for, Earth and Heaven, the singer calleth these Nasatyas hither.
g Thou art the step of Visnu, smiter of him who practiseth evil; with the Jagati metre I step across the
Eat thou the meal-cake, banded with the Maruts, wise Hero, Vrtra-slayer, drink the Soma.
9 Here of free choice let each one serve thee richly, resplendent day by day at eve and morning.
3 O Jatavedas Agni, fight and drive our foes afar from us,
e This thus should the sacrificer himself pile; if another pile his fire, if he should not prosper him with
10 And let Brhaddiva, the Mother, hear our call, and Tvastar, Father, with the Goddesses and Dames.
the Raksases. 'Thou, O Soma, brought about by ourselves', he says, for he is the one who brings about
Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision deliver us as men whom snares entangle.
5 Whom, ever furthering, in frays that win the light, in both the hosts
31 Consumptions, from her people, which follow the bride's resplendent train,These let the Holy Gods again bear to the place from which they came.
22. The amulet which Brihaspati tied for the gods, destructive of the Asuras, that has come to me together with
3. So drink, thou lover of the song, as the first drinker, of this juice.
45. Sûrya (the sun) surveys the sky, Sûrya the earth, Sûrya the waters. Sûrya is the single eye of being: he has
Give to thy praisers: let not fortune fail us. Loud may we speak, with brave men, in assembly.
The invulnerable demon's head thou clavest when thou wouldst win the praise of Atithigva.
14 Whom sawest thou to avenge the Dragon, Indra, that fear possessed thy heart when thou hadst
6 We call on you for aid by night, on you for succour in the day,
2. As such, O wonderful, whose hand holds thunder, praised as mighty, Caster of the Stone!
Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarkshya for our weal will we call hither.
2 He, like the Sun, hath shone while Morn is breaking, and priests who weave the sacrifice sing
15 May Indra drink this Soma poured to please him, and cheered therewith slay Vrtra with his thunder.
As I bestowed on him an arrow for the fight I made him worthy of the song apd hymn of praise.
6 Let us declare his deeds, the undecaying unrivalled Victor whom the Maruts follow.
12 I bend to thee as thou approachest, Rudra, even as a boy before the sire who greets him.
5 Skilled in all lore is Agni, he whom erst Atharvan brought to life.
1. High is thy juice's birth: though set in heaven, on earth it hath obtained
5 Agni, those friends of thine have turned them from thee: gracious of old, they have become
5 He who grows mightily in herbs, within each fruitful mother and each babe she bears,
10 O Agni, God, the people sing reverent praise to thee for strength:
Bless thou the liberal worshippers: bless thou the word that I have said.
3. O ye wealthy, irresistible (plants), ye do generously bestow benefits. And ye strengthen the hair, and,
10 The fiend, O Agni, who designs to injure the essence of our food, kine, steeds, or bodies,
12 Dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama's two envoys roam among the People;
22. Thee, the (pot of) earth, I place upon the earth: your substance is the same, though thine, (O pot), is modified.
2 The Fair, the Bright is come with her white offspring; to her the Dark One hath resigned her dwelling.
His wildly-restless warders never close an eye: in every place are found the bonds that bind man last.
1. To Indra, to the Mighty Steer, may these gold-coloured juices go,
says; Mitra is holy power; verily on holy power he establishes it; the sacrificer is not ruined, nor is his
3 Lord of the Forest, raise. thyself up on the loftiest spot of earth.
13 Addressed to thee is this our praise, O Indra: Lord of Bay Steeds, find us hereby advancement.
7 She seeketh men, as she who hath no brother, mounting her car, as 'twere to gather riches.
3 When the sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a car visiting all worlds, the Hero,
them; then they first grasped the new and full moon (offerings) [2]. He who is commencing the new and
praised with thirty-one, creatures were created, the Yavas and the Ayavas had the overlordship. They
And, being young for evermore, as sisters, speak to each other names that are united.
perforated is breath, the earless is life; verily he places breath and life as the highest of the breaths;
of his equals. 'Ye gods that are eleven in the sky', he says [1]; so many are the deities; verily he draws it
1. The (spell) which they skilfully prepare, as a bride for the wedding, the multiform (spell), fashioned by hand,
This Veda is made up of 6 Kandhas (Segments) with each of these having 5 to 11 Prapathakas (similar
Agni with one syllable won speech; the Açvins with two syllables won expiration and inspiration; Visnu
a The wooden sword is safety, the hammer is safety, the knife, the sacrificial enclosure, the axe is safety;
As thou with eager speed, O Sage, hast come from far away to hel
8 She first of endless morns to come hereafter, follows the path of morns that have departed.
13 The Red Bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing the heavens and earth to roar and tbunder.
3 May the most glorious Fathers aid us, and the two Goddesses, Mothers of the Gods, who strengthen
And, with the Dames accordant, give the singer a refuge unassailable and flawless.
Measured with measures, fixed their broad expanses, set the great worlds apart held firm for safety.
1. FILLED full of fatness, compassing all things that be, wide, spacious, dropping meath, beautiful in
food; verily he finds support in the Viraj, in eating food. The atmosphere is as it were unreal; the
All-feeding Pusan, Bhaga sought the oblation, as they whose steeds are fleetest seek the contest.
with it. Then indeed did they discern the world of heaven, and went to the world of heaven. Those, who
victorious. The forty-fourfold is a thunderbolt, the sixteenfold is a thunder bolt; in that he puts down
47. I cook, and I give (to the Brahmans), and so, too, my wife, at my religious rite and practice.--With the birth of a
34 May Agni slay the Vrtras,-fain for riches, through the lord of song,
of the ocean cannot get out from it. The ocean is the year [2]. Its further banks are the two Atiratras.
art rendered by thy husband a true wife, (and) by thy children rich in offspring, the sacrifice has come: receive the
1. May the protecting god kushtha come hither from the Himavant: destroy thou every takman, and all female
z I sacrifice to thee, I cast forward my prayer to thee,
4. Ye who, united, did undertake many (deeds) of old, and, moreover, did visit portents upon the. people; ye who
this home, in this world of earth; him who hateth us and him whom we hate I step over him with the
That the Gods praised their joyous Herald's labour eagerly burning, Agni, in the forests.
2. Break them, crush them, close in upon them: the amulet shall be thy vanguard in front! With the varana the
i In greatness hath he arisen erect in the van of the dawns;
19. The (liturgies called) katurhotârah, the âpri-hymns, the triennial sacrifices, the (formulas called) nîvid, the
they prospered and went to the world of heaven. Now with regard to his drinking at midday and at
is twenty-four feet. These make up tens; the Viraj has ten syllables; the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj
2 To mighty Heaven and Earth I sing forth loudly: my wish goes out desirous and well knowing
3 That was a great deed for the Godliest of the Gods: strong things were loosened and the firmly fixed
Thou, Indra, from of old, hast followed after light, since we have had thee to invoke.
5 He whom no force can stay, even as the Maruts' roar, like to a dart sent forth, even as the bolt from
fourteen. As for ten of them, the Viraj is ten-syllabled, the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj they win
7. Thou, Agni, art the homestead's Lord, our Hotar-priest at sacrifice.
Drawing and seizing, Bold One, thou who grantest wealth, drink Soma with the Rtus from the Nestar's
1 HIS bright rays bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all that lives,
4. O Agni, thou hast made the Sun, the eternal star, to mount the sky,
Saving us e'en from great transgression, Indra, the Youthful, visiteth man's home with favour.
with five (sets of) dust; they make up ten, the Viraj has ten syllables, the Viraj is food; verily he finds
The Agni that was before and the one in the fire-pan are at variance; 'Be united', with four (verses) he
2. If, O evil, thou dost not abandon us, then do we abandon thee at the fork of the road. May evil follow after
8 Sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles for his faithful friend,
Indra, whose conquering strength is powerful in war, whose fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth
The nature of rajo guṇa is that it creates intense desires for materialistic enhancement and sensual enjoyment. So, action in the mode of passion is motivated by huge ambition and characterized by intense effort. It entails heavy toil and great physical and mental fatigue. An example of rājasic action is the corporate world. Management executives regularly complain of stress. This is because their actions are usually motivated by pride and an inordinate ambition for power, prestige, and wealth. The efforts of political leaders, over-anxious parents, and business persons are also often typical examples of actions in the mode of passion.
5 If ye at any time this day are listening to this my call,
recourse to his own deity with his own share; verily he unites him with his desire; his desire is fulfilled.
Samans are limited, and the Yajuses are limited, but of the Brahman there is no end, and that he should
Vikankata; it entered barley, it stayed in barley; that is why barley has its name [5]. In that the Manthin
ruined; an ox must be given by the Hotr; the ox is a carrier, the Hotr is a carrier; verily he saves himself
5 What time the thunder fell and Susna perished, all life's support from the great Druh was taken.
5. Fit together hair with hair, and fit together skin with skin! Thy blood, thy bone shall grow: what is cut join thou
strength; may he protect this holy power, this lordly power; may they protect this holy power, this lordly
Listen and hear the prayers which now we offer, and let this sacrifice increase thy vigour.
deity should he cut off and according to each utter the Yajya; verily he arranges them in due order with
1. We know the father of the arrow, Parg-anya, who furnishes bountiful fluid, and well do we know his mother,
Thirdly the Manly-souled was in the waters. The pious lauds and kindles him the Eternal.
They have embraced within themselves all energies, which, issuing forth, again into their bodies pass.
9 Whoso this day, O God whose flames are lovely, prepares a cake, O Agni, mixt with butter,
He, stirring both the Races, goes between the two, the bearer of the word of men and word of Gods.
14 To the brown juice may his dear vigorous Bay Steeds bring Indra, to our holy task.
sacrificial gifts, he would appropriate his fire; him who piles his fire he should prosper with sacrificial
life, with fair life', he says; verily seizing the gods [1] he rises up. 'Fare along the wide atmosphere', he
With whom we will incite the Child of Waters whom vigorous course swift as thought bring hither.
sacrifice by which (special) wishes are fulfilled, together with the metres, the sacrifices that have passed out, and
The entire downward spiral leading to ruin begins with contemplating happiness in sense objects. Now, the urge for happiness is as natural to the soul as thirst is to the physical body. It is impossible to think “I will not contemplate happiness anywhere,” because it is unnatural for the soul. The simple solution then is to envision happiness in the proper direction, i.e. in God. If we can repeatedly revise the thought that happiness is in God, we will develop attachment toward him. This divine attachment will not degrade the mind like material attachment; rather, it will purify it. God is all-pure, and when we attach our mind to him, the mind will also become pure.Thus, whenever Shree Krishna asks us to give up attachment and desire, he is referring only to material attachment and desire. Spiritual attachment and desire are not to be given up; in fact, they are most praiseworthy. They are to be cultivated and increased for purification of the mind. The greater the burning desire we develop for God, the purer our mind will become. The jñānīs who propound the worship of the undifferentiated attributeless Brahman do not understand this point when they recommend giving up all attachments. However, Shree Krishna states: “Those who attach their minds to me with unadulterated devotion rise above the three modes of material nature and attain the level of the supreme Brahman.” (Bhagavad Gita 14.26) He repeatedly urges Arjun to attach his mind to God in many verses ahead, such as 8.7, 8.14, 9.22, 9.34, 10.10, 12.8, 11.54, 18.55, 18.58, 18.65, etc.Attachment and aversion are two sides of the same coin. Aversion is nothing but negative attachment. Just as, in attachment, the object of attachment repeatedly comes to one’s mind; similarly, in aversion, the object of hatred keeps popping into the mind. So attachment and aversion to material objects both have the same effect on the mind—they dirty it and pull it into the three modes of material nature. When the mind is free from both attachment and aversion, and is absorbed in devotion to God, one receives the grace of God and experiences his unlimited divine bliss. On experiencing that higher taste, the mind no longer feels attracted to the sense objects, even while using them. Thus, even while tasting, touching, smelling, hearing, and seeing, like all of us, the sthita prajña is free from both attachment and aversion.
2 What am I now to do with this thy saying? I have gone from thee like the first of Mornings.
offering) is on seven potsherds; the Maruts are in seven troops; verily in troops he wins his rivals for
When to the praise-singers he gives the boon of substance rich in kine.
with black neck, and a brown (beast) to Soma; the body of him whose illness is long goes to Agni, the
Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war, be thou our great encourager. Let the
30 Soma, do thou secure for us the treasures of the earih and heaven,
9. By generation long ago, this God, engendered for the Gods,
Prosper my house, ye with auspicious voices. Your power is glorified in our assemblies.
May thy strong Steed, through our ancestral worship, bring food and wealth with heroes to our dwelling.
When men with strewn clipt grass and sacrificial gifts offer thee entertainment, piously inclined.
5. The earth upon which of old the first men unfolded themselves, upon which the gods overcame the Asuras,
4 With kine and horses satisfy this longing with very splendid bounty still extend it.
May the Gods cat our offering consecrated according to this true Priest's voice and guidance.
Invoker! wealth to quell the strong, that singers may extol thee. Be near us in fight for our success.
2 O Indra-Varuna, mighty and very rich One of you is called Monarch and One Autocrat.
Here, Shree Krishna describes twenty-six virtues of a saintly nature. These should be cultivated as a part of our spiritual practice for elevating ourselves to the supreme goal.Fearlessness. It is the state of freedom from concern for present and future miseries. Inordinate attachment of any kind causes fear. Attachment to wealth leads to dread of impoverishment, attachment to social prestige causes fear of infamy, attachment to vice leads to anxiety about the consequences of sin, attachment to bodily comfort causes the fear of ill-health, and so on. Detachment and surrender to God vanquish all fear from the heart.Purity of mind. This is the state of inner cleanliness. The mind generates and harbors thoughts, sentiments, feelings, emotions, etc. When these are ethical, wholesome, positive, and uplifting, the mind is considered pure, and when they are unethical and degrading, the mind is considered impure. Attachment to objects in the modes of passion and ignorance contaminate the mind, while attachment to God purifies it.Steadfastness in spiritual knowledge. It is said: tattva vismaraṇāt bhekivat [v1] “When human beings forget what is right and what is wrong they become like animals.” Thus, the path of virtue is forged by remaining steadfast in the awareness of spiritual principles.Charity. It refers to the giving away of one’s possessions for a good cause or to needy persons. True charity is that which is done, not with a feeling of superiority, but with a sense of gratefulness to God for the opportunity to help. Material charity, done for the welfare of the body, helps others temporarily. Spiritual charity, done at the platform of the soul, helps eliminate the cause of all suffering, which is separation from God. Consequently, it is considered higher than material charity.Control of the senses. The senses are notorious in their ability to drag the mind deeper into material illusion. They tempt the living being to seek immediate gratification. However, walking the path of virtue requires forsaking the lower sensual pleasures for achieving the higher goal. Thus, restraint of the senses is an essential virtue for treading the path to God.Sacrifice. It means executing one’s Vedic duties and social obligations, even though they may not be enjoyable. Sacrifice is considered perfect when it is done for the pleasure of God.Study of the sacred books. An important aspect of cultivating the divine nature is to feed the intellect with uplifting knowledge from the scriptures. When the intellect is illumined with proper knowledge, one’s actions naturally become sublime.Austerity. The body-mind-senses are such that, if we pamper them, they become pleasure-seeking, but if we restrain them, they become disciplined. Thus, austerity is the voluntary acceptance of hardships for purifying the body, mind, and intellect.Straightforwardness. Simplicity in speech and conduct unclutters the mind and engenders the sprouting of noble thoughts. The English phrase “simple living, high thinking” aptly expresses the benefits of the virtue of straightforwardness.Non-violence. It means not impeding the progressive life of other living beings through thought, word, or deed.Truthfulness. It means restraining oneself from distorting facts to suit one’s purpose. God is the Absolute Truth, and hence the practice of truthfulness takes us toward him; on the other hand, falsehood, while convenient, takes us away from God.Absence of anger. The manifestation of anger is a defect of the material mind. It takes place when the desires for happiness are obstructed and things do not turn out how one envisaged. By developing detachment and surrender to the will of God, one overcomes anger.Renunciation. The entire material energy belongs to God and it is meant for his pleasure. Hence, the opulences of the world are not for one’s enjoyment, but for being utilized in the service of God. To be fixed in this understanding is renunciation.Peacefulness. The cultivation of virtue requires mental poise. Peacefulness is the ability to retain inner equilibrium despite disturbing external situations.Restraint from fault-finding. The whole world and everything in it is a mixture of good and bad qualities. Focusing upon defects in others dirties our mind, while focusing upon their virtues purifies it. The nature of a saintly person is to see his or her own defects and observe the virtues of others.Compassion toward all living beings. As individuals evolve spiritually, they naturally rise above self-centeredness and develop empathy for all living beings. Compassion is the deep sympathy that arises upon seeing the sufferings of others.Absence of covetousness. Greed is the desire to accumulate more than what one legitimately needs for the maintenance of the body. Under its sway, people acquire huge amounts of wealth and possessions, though they know, that at the time of death, everything will be left behind. Freedom from such covetousness leads to contentment and inner peace.Gentleness. The disposition of behaving roughly with others arises from insensitivity to their feelings. But as one grows in spiritual stature, one naturally sheds crudeness in behavior. Gentleness is a sign of spiritual refinement.Modesty. Hrīḥ means “sense of guilt in performing actions contrary to the injunctions of scriptures and society.” The saintly nature is imbued with a ruthless inner conscience that gives one a sense of guilt in committing sinful acts.Lack of fickleness. We may begin with good intentions, but if we get distracted by temptations and hardships, we cannot complete the journey. Success on the path of virtue comes by unwaveringly pursuing the goal despite all diversions that come on the way.Vigor. From purity of mind comes a deep inner drive to act according to one’s values and beliefs. Hence, saintly personalities bring immense power and vigor to the tasks they pursue.Forgiveness or forbearance. This is the ability to tolerate the offences of others, without feeling the need to retaliate. Through forgiveness, one heals the emotional wounds caused by others that would otherwise fester and disturb the mind.Fortitude. It is the inner strength and determination in pursuing the goal, even when the mind and senses are wearied due to unfavorable circumstances. Most of the important things in the world have been accomplished by people who kept on trying when there seemed to be no hope at all. Sri Aurobindo put this very eloquently: “You have to be more persistent than the difficulty; there is no other way.”Cleanliness. It refers to both internal and external purity. Virtuous people believe in maintaining external cleanliness because it is conducive to internal purity. George Bernard Shaw said, “Better keep yourself clean and bright; you are the window through which you must see the world.”Bearing enmity toward none. Bearing enmity toward others poisons our own mind, and this becomes an impediment in the path of spiritual progress. The quality of freedom from hatred toward others is developed by realizing that they are also like us, and God resides in all.Absence of vanity. Self-praise, boastfulness, ostentation, etc. all stem from pride. Saintly personalities see nothing in themselves to be proud about, but instead, feel gratitude to God for the good qualities they possess. Thus, they refrain from self-aggrandizement.
4.9.2 Sukta 2 – Prayer to Kama (Love), personified as a Primordial Power
2 To Asamati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, a radiant car,
5. They (the cattle) who wander along the rays of the sun, or they who wander along the flood of light) they whose
The hidden pair, heaven and the earth, thou foundest, and to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure.
For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
Prajapati desired, 'May I be an eater of food.' He saw this (rite of) seventeen nights; he grasped it, and
4 Since Matarisvan, far-diffused, bath stirred him, and he in every house grown bright and noble,
continues the sacrifice in itself. He brings (it) up from above verily thus he impregnates seed; he takes
Downward the milch-cow pours her milk: so downward go thy pain and grief.
this he won cattle; in that he puts it down, he wins cattle. He puts down the Gayatris on the east; the
1. Through all this world strode Vishnu: thrice his foot he planted, and the whole
The Frogs who give us cows in hundreds lengthen our lives in this most fertilizing season.
in that he offers the subsidiary sacrifices, verily thus the sacrificer creates offspring. He cuts off from the
1. Upon the head of the nimble antelope a remedy grows! He has driven the kshetriya (inherited disease) in all
1. Here thou the call of the juice-drinking press-stone: mark thou the sage's hymn who sings and lauds
drives the last of his cows he should cast against his foe; verily he casts misfortune upon him.
To Agni, maker of paths, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds who being a sacrificer at full and
1. BOUNDLESS and wasting not, the heavenly food of Gods goes to the foeless One, doer of
And, being what thou art, vouchsafe us kine and steeds, strength meet for praist and hero might.
The Gods to the Nasatyas cried, Bring these together once again.
Here, Lord Krishna states that he reciprocates with everyone as they surrender to him. For those who deny the existence of God, he meets them in the form of the law of karma—he sits inside their hearts, notes their actions, and dispenses the results. But such atheists too cannot get away from serving him; they are obliged to serve God’s material energy, Maya, in its various apparitions, as wealth, luxuries, relatives, prestige, etc. Maya holds them under the sway of anger, lust, and greed. On the other hand, for those who turn their mind away from worldly attractions and look upon God as the goal and refuge, he takes care of them just as a mother takes care of her child.Shree Krishna uses the word bhajāmi, which means “to serve.” He serves the surrendered souls, by destroying their accumulated karmas of endless lifetimes, cutting the bonds of Maya, removing the darkness of material existence, and bestowing divine bliss, divine knowledge, and divine love. And when the devotee learns to love God selflessly, he willingly enslaves himself to their love. Shree Ram thus tells Hanuman:ekaikasyopakārasya prāṇān dāsyāmi te kapeśheṣhasyehopakārāṇāṁ bhavām ṛiṇino vayaṁ(Vālmīki Ramayan)[v14]“O Hanuman, to release myself from the debt of one service you performed for me, I shall have to offer my life to you. For all the other devotional services done by you, I shall remain eternally indebted.” In this way, God reciprocates with everyone as they surrender to him.If God is so merciful upon his devotees, why do some people worship the celestial gods instead? He explains in the following verse.
25. Rohita, the sharp-horned bull, who surpasses Agni and surpasses Sûrya, who props up the earth and the sky,
3 Soldier unchecked, war-rousing, battling Hero, unconquered from of old, victorious ever,
3. The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream of the creative juice:
May Rodasi and Varunani hear us, and Goddesses come at the Matrons' season.
9 Song chanted by us men, O Agni, Ancient One, has swelled unto the deathless Gods in lofty heavenA milch-cow yielding to the singer in the rites wealth manifold, in hundreds, even as he wills.
the Atiratra; the Sodaçin is the thunderbolt; verily having won cattle for him by the thunderbolt, he
9 Come, Vayu, drawn by fair hymns, to our sacrifice that reaches heaven.
7 Lord of the house, what plenty fills the songs which thou inspirest now,
restraint. 'Thou art a hundred-edged, of the tree, slayer of the foe', he says; verily he sharpens the bolt,
for the Sadas has Indra for its deity. Now the knot which he first ties, if he were not to unloose it, the
9. Agni I deem our Hotar-priest, munificent wealth-giver, Son of Strength, who, knoweth all that is, even as the
then an Atiratra, for the separation of these worlds. On each day in succession he gives three hundred
10 Visnu, the guardian, keeps the loftiest station, upholding dear, immortal dwelling-places.
7 Up stands the stone, high burns the fire enkindled: Aditi's lap contains the Friendly Natures
3 From front, as 'twere a house, he ruled and measured; pierced with his bolt the fountains of the rivers,
1 WHAT shall we sing to Rudra, strong, most bounteous, excellently wise,
7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasisthas, O Indra-Vayu, with our fair laudations,
owner of cattle he becomes who knowing thus offers the four-day rite.
On us with loving-kindness Heaven and Earth bestow riches and various wealth and treasure
May Pusan guard us from misfortune, us that prosper holy order
surrounded me', he says; verily he unites him with both power and the gods. If he were not to utter that
6 Do this, O Agni, when we urge thee, quickly, triumphant in thy might subdue our foemen.
k Thou art fuel; may we prosper; thou art kindling; thou art brilliance, grant me brilliance.
9 Thou quickly passest by all others, Agni, for him to whom thou hast appeared most lovely,
2 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this Indra's n-dghty arms in war.
Like Usana, the priest a laud shall utter, a hymn to thee, the Lord Divine, who markest.
2 The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship: to the kine came the Bull, the Heifer's Offipring
He who desires offspring should offer (the oblations to) the minor deities; the minor deities are the
5 He seeks no enterprise with five or ten to aid, nor stays with him who pours no juice though
35 To Soma come the Cows, the Milch-kine longing, to Soma sages with their hvmns inquiring.
lightning; when it moves about, there is thundering; when it makes water, there is rain; its speech is
6 O waxing Agni, knower, thou, of all, accept our gifts, the cake,
When he, the Bright, unchanged by eld, consumes the sovrans of the wood.
6 The Waters have their healing power, the Waters drive disease away.
2 What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the pool's bed, the floods of heaven descended,
panic seeds to Soma, the strong. For the seed, the strength, departs from him, then he fears impotence;
f With that devotion wherewith the seers performed the session of sacrifice [2],
1. WE, Indra, Lord of ample wealth, our Guide, depend on one like thee,
8 Sarasvati, who camest with the Fathers, with them rejoicing thee in our oblations,
Thou in the raw cows, black of hue or ruddy, storest the ripe milk glossy white in colour.
eye, ear, skill, might, force, strength, life, old age, breath, body, protection, guard, limbs, bones, joints,
10 Many are they who strengthen Law, Sun-eyed, with Agni for their tongue,
That plenteous bounty which thou hast to give to the pious man,
supports the Brahman, one supports oneself; if one opposes the Brahman, one opposes oneself therefore
They shall all concordantly call thee; rule here, a mighty, benevolent (king), to up the tenth decade (of thy life)!
29 To thee most oft invoked, amid the many singers' rivalry
4 Far-sighted Soma, Sage and Seer, is worshipped in the central point
May these new hymns and prayers that I have fashioned delight you to the profit of the singer.
with it he approaches the sacrifice. Ghee pertains to the gods, sour cream to the Pitrs, well-seasoned
following the breath. From left to right they turn, around their own strength they turn; therefore the right
3 A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of fleecy sheep,
1. May we be in harmony with our kinfolk, in harmony with strangers; do ye, O Asvins, establish here agreement
3. Approach, O Indra, basting thee, Lord of bay horses, to our prayers:
2 When thou wast roaming, waxen strong in body, telling thy might, Indra, among the people,
For innocence we pray to Surya and to Dawn. So may the flowing Soma bring us bliss to-day.
8 Let Bharati come quickly to our worship, and Ila showing like a human being.
Forming again with you auspicious friendship, let us rejoice with draughts of meath together.
2 The Holy, whose are earth and heaven, and succour waits upon his strength;
3) The Bhagavan Mahima (Full set of Hindu Scriptures; 1999) by Pandit Angirasa Muni and his
Keçin Darbhya, 'The seven-footed Çakvari I shall use for thee at the sacrifice to-morrow, by whose
6 Let the swift steeds who carry thee, thought-yoked and dropping holy oil,
In whom, through his great powers, oblation-eating cows in their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk.
win food by the Viraj. In five places they sing sitting down; there are five quarters; verily they rest on
With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, glut evermore thy bolt, O Foe-destroyer.
a Surrounding Agni, surrounding Indra, surrounding the All-gods, surrounding me with splendour, be
sacrifice; verily he unites the sacrifice with the sacrifice. 'The Rudras, having gathered together the
And, Indra, Soma drinker, come to listen to our songs Of praise!
contain the word 'head'; therefore the head (of the fire) is in front. Five he puts down in the right hip,
two feet; verily afterwards he finds support in cattle. The Puronuvakya is the Gayatri, the Yajya, the
The conscious Dawns went forth to meet his coming, and the sole Master of the kine was Indra.
m Thou art of easy access, divine tree. Being erect, guard me until the completion (of the sacrifice).
5 Ye six divine Expanses, grant us freedom: here, all ye Gods, acquit yourselves like heroes.
Give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye Rudras, Lords of ample wealth.
Cast forth your weapon at the fiends against the sorcerers hurt your bolt.
a He offers on eleven potsherds to Indra and Agni, clotted curds to the Maruts, clotted curds to Varuna,
9 Agni, the patriarchal men, the mortals who have in many places spread thy lustre,Be gracious to us here for their sake also.
Swift as the wind let the prince please and feast you: he, like a pious man, gains strength for increase.
Coming, he orders f6r the Gods their portion. The Moon prolongs the days of our existence.
1. HE like a bull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly excites and agitates all the people:
We invocate for help Indra untouched by eld, who maketh all decay, strengthened, for ever young.
be propagated.' He gave it to the Vasus, they bore it for three days, thereby [5] they created three
All Deities within their hearts assented, and ye, Nasatyas, are close linked with glory.
born, O man, that (death) and we call after thee: do not die before old age!
strength one defeats the enemies that have arisen and those that shall be, by the first half of whose
21 Wherewith ye served Krsanu where the shafts were shot, and helped the young man's horse to
Thou, O Agni, to the man eager to worship, O ancient king [4].
The woods are given to the birds. These statutes of the God Savitar none disobeyeth.
9 What time ye came with strong steeds swiftly speeding, O Usana and Indra, to the dwelling,
2 Turned to this All, far-spreading, she hath risen and shone in brightness with white robes about her.
2 Throughout the dusky firmament advancing, laying to rest the immortal and the mortal,
The sling is of six fathoms in extent; the seasons are six; verily he raises him with the seasons; if it is of
afflicted', he says, for she protected them when afflicted. 'May Agni, named Nabhas, know (thee) [2], O
They never break the Gods' eternal statutes, and injure none, in rivalry with Vasus.
invoked', he says; verily he invokes the Hotras. 'The cow is invoked with the bull', he says [2]; verily he
speech; verily they win the highest (form of) speech. They beat the earth-drum; verily they win that
17. As the sun is resplendent, as in him brilliance has been deposited, thus shall the amulet of varana hold fast for
d The drop, the shoot, that hath fallen on the ground,
4 Hither with songs of praise we call Indra to drink the Soma juice:
the Jagati, the quarters with the Anustubh; verily he wins in order these worlds with the metres. Prajapati
O God, come by those paths so fair to travel, preserve thou us from harm this day, and bless us.
Like young trees shooting up on high their branches, his flames are rising to the vault of heaven.
4 Break down the, strong seats even of the demons: cleansing thee, Indu, robd thyself in vigour.
6 And Indra, like the Herald Priest, desirous of the milky juice,
What deed of yours, new every age, wondrous, surpassing man, rings forth,
Him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre, this heaven, and both the worlds, and air's midregion.
3. Still turning to their aim in thee the sacrificer's sister hymns
eleven times on the second occasion; the Tristubh has eleven syllables, the midday pressing is connected
2 O Lord of Strength, whose jaws are strong, great deeds are thine, the powerful:
it to its own deity; then did he create offspring and cattle. He who desires offspring [4] and cattle should
Brahman priest; thou art Indra, the kindly. O Brahman! Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest; thou art
book for Dharmins – The Dharma Veda. This book will act as a guide for Dharmins and as an index
3. Thou, Indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steeds and kine:
1. THESE who wear hair-knots on the right, the movers of holy thought, white-robed, have won me
2 I looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old,
dweller in the sky, maker of room; grant room to this thy sacrificer.
2 Thy well-winged flashes strengthen in their manner, when the black Bull hath bellowed round about
3 Thou, mighty Indra, sprangest into being as strength for lovely lordship o'er the people.
of men (shall be ours)! May the lovely goddess that bore Indra come to us, endowed with lustre!
12 They call him in the farther half of heaven the Sire five-footed, of twelve forms, wealthy in watery
Striving to win, we celebrate his many deeds of hero might.
raised his bolt, aided by Visnu. He said, 'Hurl it not at me; I will give to thee that by which I [5] am this
9 The prudent worshipper, like Pusan, Asvins! praises you as he praises Dawn and Agni,
3. This Agni is the Lord supreme above all glories' mid the Gods:
2 Sons of the Sea, mighty to save discoverers of riches, ye
The Strong hath loosed his bolt with the swift rush of rain, and he hath rent in pieces Susna's firm-built
Mighty art thou by all thy powers and greatness, by glories art thou glorious, guide of mortals.
holy power (Brahman). 'May Brhaspati extend this for us', he says; Brhaspati is the holy power
c Thou art good, the best of rays, thou art life-bestowing, bestow life
the Jayas have their name; in that they won the kingdom with the Rastrabhrts, that is why the
Who cast down Varcin's sons, a hundred thousand,-to him, to Indra, offer ye the Soma.
from sin, an oblation; to the Açvins, saviours from sin, grain; to the Maruts, saviours from evil, on seven
4 What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which they fashioned out the earth and
That which lay secret, hidden in the waters, he held in his right hand, the rich rewarder.
In these verses, Shree Krishna gives a glimpse into the various aspects of His infinite personality. Kratu means yajña (sacrifice), such as agnihotra yajñas mentioned in the Vedas. It also refers to the yajñas, such as vaiśhva deva that are described in the Smṛiti scriptures. Auṣhadham refers to the potency in medicinal herbs.Creation emanates from God, and hence He is its Pitā (Father). Before creation, He holds the unmanifested material energy in His womb, and so He is also its Mātā (Mother). He maintains the universe and nourishes it, and thus He is its Dhātā (Sustainer). He is also the Father of Brahma, who is the creator, and hence, He is the Grandfather of this universe.The Vedas have emanated from God. The Ramayan states: jākī sahaja svāsa śhruti chārī “God manifested the Vedas by His breath.” They are the knowledge potency of God, and hence an aspect of His unlimited personality. Shree Krishna states this truth dramatically by saying that He is the Vedas.
10 Rolled in the midst of never-ceasing currents flowing without a rest for ever onward.
28 As to Varosusaman thou broughtest great riches, for their gain,
(Stoma) is light; verily he attains light, and a support besides, for the twenty-one fold (Stoma) is support.
sacrifice; in that he puts down the Stomabhagas, (it is) for the support of the sacrifice. Seven by seven he
42 O newly married couple! May you make a stable family, never to separate. Enjoy the full span of
The kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, the head and chief with milk within the vessels.
2 Thine is the Herald's task and Cleanser's duly timed; Leader art thou, and Kindler for the pious man.
w O Agni to-day, let us make to prosper by praises,
fumigates with horse-dung; the horse is connected with Prajapati; (verily it serves) to connect it with its
Let my eyes be opened to behold you; Let my mind be eager to know you;
6. When, Vasu, wilt thou love the laud? Now let the Channel bring the stream.
verily they two place power and strength in him; with power and strength he approaches the battle and
5 O Indu, we draw nigh to thee, with this one object day by day:
seasons; the quail to the year; the pigeon, the owl, the hare, these are for Nirrti; the cock for Savitr.
I load with wealth the zealous sdcrificer who pours the juice and offers his oblation
10 Yea, verily, thou art a Bull, with a bull's rush. whom none may stay:
him for the winning of the world of heaven [4]; verily also grasping the deities he goes to the world of
7 Where art thou? Whither art thou gone? For many a place attracts thy mind.
Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye assist the worshipper who sheds the juice.
the Gostoma; verily by it they find support in the atmosphere. They perform thirdly the Ayustoma;
The earth which they place in the moon by their offerings,
8 Honour the oblation-bearer, him who knows fair rites, serve ye the Household Friend who knows all
night the Raksases are active; verily he smites them when active; he should offer in (a place) which is
9 Praising with songs the praise-worthy who cometh to our aid, we call
Prajapati desired, 'May I be propagated.' He saw this Daçahotr, and offered it. By this he created (the
is Rudra here; if he were to pour over the former offerings, he would give Rudra cattle, and the sacrificer
6. Indra shall confuse the army, the Miaruts shall slay it with might! Agni shall rob it of its sight; vanquished it shall
6 These blissful Maruts sing their psalm to praise thee, and pour to thee libation of the Soma.
4 To him who worshippeth hath Indra given many and matchless gifts. He slayeth Vrtra.
(earth); verily on this earth he takes firm root. Thereafter let him make the offering to Indra and Agni on
6 Indra, as such, give us a share of sunlight, of waters, sinlessness, and reputation.
liable to injure him. He puts down the mortar; this is the navel of the fire; verily he piles the fire with its
10 In the sheep's wool hath Soma Pavamana flowed, while they cleanse him, like a playful infant,
giving radiance, in radiance; thee giving wealth, in wealth I place; with this seer, the holy power, this
Dhatr first; verily he produces pairing with him, Anumati gives approval to him, Raka gives, Sinivali
Varuna (shall be ours)! May the lovely goddess that bore Indra come to us, endowed with lustre!
wealth', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. 'O ye waters, goddesses, purifying', he says; that is
7 Lovely is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath shone forth, seated in the heavens, refulgent.
5. Heard be our prayer! In thought I honour Agni first: now straightway we elect this heavenly company, Indra and
4 Golden, far-seeing, from the heaven he riseth: far is his goal, he hasteth on resplendent.
The theologians say [3], 'For what reason is it that the Gayatri, the smallest of the metres, holds the
Who must be praised in holy rites, the Priest most welcome in the house.
Down from the heavens the Falcon brought thee hitherward, even thee, O Indu, thee whom all our
15. The rain of Mitra and Varuna does not moisten the oppressor of Brahmans; the assembly is not complacent
11 Fathers whom Agni's flames have tasted, come ye nigh: ye kindly leaders, take ye each your proper
verily he bestows upon himself the sacrifice and the waters. All creatures attend him who is performing
The Seven sister Bays bear Surya on his car, to bring us wealth and happiness.
Agni, gold is connected with Agni; verily by him whose is gold he gains it; it is (offered) to Savitr;
1 WE seeking strength with Soma-drops fill full your Indra like a well,
Now the Raksases following in its track seek to injure the sacrifice; he makes a libation in the two tracks
10 God! May we conquer poverty by removing ignorance. May we conquer hunger by being
three with dewlaps are (to be offered) to Visnu, the wide goer; three of two and a half years old are for
2 Bright juices bitherward have sped thee, Indra, Lover of the Song.
By day, at night, with most auspicious favor! Not only now the draught hath drawn the Asvins.
That speed along the shining path, thou making ways art glorified.
Aditi; those of auspicious mark and hornless are for sky and earth.
27 So they who toil with juices send thee forward for the Gods' repast:
8 Let not this fetter bind us fast: may he release us for success;
Looker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord, Indra, of what moveth not.
Tanunaptra. 'May thy every shoot, O god Soma, swell', be says. Whatever [4] of it becomes spoiled' or is
Whenever we accomplish anything substantial, we are overcome with the pride that we have done something great. The pride of being the doer of one’s actions is a stumbling block to rising beyond material consciousness. However, the God-conscious karm yogis overcome this obstacle with ease. With purified intellect, they see themselves as separate from the body, and hence they do not attribute their bodily actions to themselves. The body is made from the material energy of God, and thus they attribute all their works as done by the power of God. Since they have surrendered to the will of God, they depend upon Him to inspire their mind and intellect in accordance with His divine will. So, they remain situated in the understanding that God is the doer of everything.The Sage Vasishth advised Lord Ram:kartā bahirkartāntarloke vihara rāghava (Yog Vāsiṣhṭh)“O Ram, externally engage in actions diligently, but internally practice to see yourself as the non-doer and God as the prime mover of all your activities.” In this divine consciousness, the karm yogis see themselves as mere instruments in the hands of God. Shree Krishna explains in the following verse the consequences of work done in this consciousness.
2 On, onward to a glorious home; dear to the people void of guile,
2. Like thee, thyself, for singers yoked, thou movest, as it were besought,
12 Ye cows, protect the fount: the two Mighty Ones bless the sacrifice.
Blazing, 'twere, he burns each covetous man away, he burns, the tyrannous away.
3 For ye have won a blessed name together: yea, with one aim ye strove, O Vrtra-slayers.
with the gods; he offers on the southern half; this is the quarter of the Pitrs; verily in their own quarter he
2 Bring him with reverence hither, most propitious in sacrifices, true to Law, the herald;
2. Him who with might of both his arms broke nine-and-ninety castles down,
dwelling, act, power, aim, strength, moving and going (prosper through the sacrifice).
That bounty, treasure-finder! bring, filling full both thy hands, to us!
12. A bull with a thousand horns, Gâtavedas (fire), endowed with sacrifices of ghee, carrying soma upon his back,
From thee who banquetest with Gods, from thee who banquetest with us.
Puroruc, it is as when one brings (something) to a superior; in that he draws the cup, it is as when having
To Agni his body goes, to Soma his sap,--Varuna grasps him with Varuna's noose--to Sarasvati the
Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen: may they be gracious unto us and bless us.
So came ye unto this my true conviction, and drank libations of the flowing Soma.
34 Before them sink the very hills deerning themseives abysses: yea,
5 With mightier strength he conquered strength, with energy he crushed their wrath.
1. THY blessed majesty, victorious Agni, shines brightly in the neighbourhood of Surya.
As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, thee Satakratu, Lord of Bays.
Drawn, Satakratu! through the hole of car, of wagon, and of yoke.
16 Rapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to thejoy, bringing.your swiftly-coming help,
5 Be thou, O Agni, nearest us with succour, our closest Friend while now this Morn is breaking.
3 What God shall we worship with our oblations? The One who, by his power and greatness, rules
To pardon any sins we have committed. Verily mortal man is full of longings.
performed it, and then horns appeared. They said, 'We have gained (them), let us cease (the rite), for we
seven feet, the Çakvari is cattle; verily he wins cattle. For this world the Garhapatya is established, for
His consort Sasvati with joy addressed him, Now art thou well, my lord, and shalt be happy.
the overlords. They praised with twenty-one, the whole-hooved cattle were created, Varuna was the
11 Bored deep, but not pierced through with holes, are ye, O Stones, not loosened, never weary, and
3. The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is destined,. flow
1. LAID like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been loosed like a young calf to the udder of its dam.
He offers the Savitr offerings, for instigation. He offers with (an oblation) ladled up four times, cattle
14 Slayer of foes, whatever aid of thine imparts the swiftest course,
17. With the weapon with which the god drove forth the Asuras, with which Indra led the Dasyus to the nethermost
13 The sacrificial flames most swiftly hear the call: the priest of the assembly gaineth wealth for hymns.
By whom we bring to us Mitra and Varuna, and Indra for our great defence.
Thou hast made herbs to grow for our enjoyment: yea, thou hast won thee praise from living creatures.
o I bestrew the two which slay the Raksas, which slay the spell, and which are of Visnu.
3 Age after age Vaisvanara, neighing like a horse, is kindled with the women by the Kusikas.
eager for success, knowing the way, do thou distribute glory to many in the battle!
The drops poured forth have made him glad: pay reverence to his might supreme.
7 Naught hindered his production, Bounteous Giver: his Mother and his Sire were free to send him.
1. To Indra, to the mighty let these golden-coloured juices go,
his expiration he finds support in yonder world, of expiration and inspiration he is not liable to be
6 Once to the driver of his chariot, Kutsa, he gave up greedy Surya, plague of harvest;
17. When thou, the barber, shearest with thy sharp well-whetted razor our hair and beard, do not, while cleansing
in these worlds. These, (Stomas) being sung together make up the Viraj [1], and two verses are
5 With many a son, father of many daughters, He clangs and clashes as he goes to battle.
Indra, the Agnidh with Visnu; (verily the division is) just as they two agreed upon. Then some say, 'The
6 O Soma with the spirit still within us, blest with progeny,
west, for it is leaning over for the sacrifice. He should cut one of five cubits for him of whom he desires,
oblation to Aryaman who desires, 'May people be fain to give to me'; Aryaman is yonder sun, Aryaman
10 As erst Kaksivan and the Rsi Vyasva, as erst Dirghatamas invoked your presence,
6 Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, the earth, the heavens, the firmament, the
11 Lord, make me immortal in a world in which my desires are fulfilled and where happiness and joy
with three syllables won the three worlds; Soma with four syllables won four-footed cattle; Pusan with
3 O Manyu, overcome thou our assailant on! breaking, slaying, crushing down the foemen.
Indra, who mounts his chariot at his bay steeds' cry, shatters e'en things that stand most firm.
Far, far, Lord of the brave I and give us easy paths.
One whose commandments the cosmic forces carry out; the One who bestows immortality or death.
[5], he says; strength is food; verily he wins food. 'Let the sacrifice invoke favour, and bring the gods',
1. The Sage hath robed him in the sheep's wool for the banquet of the Gods,
2. That through this famed one's power he may stand by us, even as Tvasbtar comes
which they have put into raw meat, that do I hurl back again.
Thou art the Lord, as such sit on this holy grass: thy vessels are inviolate as Law commands.
16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim these were the carliest holy ordinances.
He, who yokes Agni where the yoking is to be performed, yokes him (best) among those who are
And Syava, cut into three several pieces, ye brougnt to life again, O bounteous Asvins.
Let us not he exposed to that, ye Holy! May your most loving favour still attend us.
3 Yea, this is by the light of him whom powerful siong hath bound to act,
4 Not stirred to anger, come, Free-giver, nigh to us, to take this gift of ours, thou who hast goats for
8 Resplendent are thy rays of light: loud is thy voice like pressing-stones.
over powers the power and strength of his rival, he overcomes the evil foe. Now power and strength
Ye, Universal Gods! are all-controllers: may he do harm unto himself who hates Me.
them both; then indeed did cattle resort to Prajapati. For him who desires cattle should he offer this
Eastward is seen the Banner of the Morning, the Banner born to give Heaven's Daughter glory.
19 Thou from the lofty plains above, O Indra, hurledst Vrtra down.
You notice our sins. May we be repentant of our sins.
Ahavaniya (fire)' he should reply. In that he puts the bundle on the Ahavaniya, he makes the sacrificer
54 Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake and Prsana, wrought in battle.
3 Before his presence must we all assemble, this God's whom men have seized in his white splendour.
9 Indu at holy rites produced you, Heaven and Earth, the Friends of men,
b If he were to set up (the eleven posts) commensurate with the wings [1], he would make the sacrificial
valiant son is born to him. One should disregard this and offer twice. With the first (offering) one grasps
6 The bounteous Maruts with the fatness dropping milk fill full the waters which avail in solenm rites.
Eager, propitious, may the balmy Goddess hear our effectual speech, our invocation.
days; verily is he propagated. To them the Adityas said, 'Ye have been propagated; let us [6] be
did not eat his food; he should offer to Agni on eight potsherds, to Vaiçvanara on twelve potsherds,
2.4.2 Prapathaka 2: The Preparation of the Ground for the Fire
With sharpened. arms, with swift bow, never vanquished in battle, vanquishing in fight the foemen.
there he created offspring; the oblation of him whose Dhruva, is made of Vikankata, wood finds rest;
Bring meed, as 'twere, to one who makes thee glad with hymns.
4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people, Indra, in the fray invoke thee.
o O ye steeds, prize winning, about to run for the prize, about to win the prize, do ye touch Brhaspati's
7. O Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu, thou most active, bring
11 Her tooth a deer, dressed in an eagle's feathers, bound with cow-hide, launched forth, She flieth
14 Fifteen in number, then, for me a score of bullocks they prepare,
What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do they call his thighs and feet?
mouths on both sides, for who [1] knows where is the mouth of the seasons? 'Give directions for the
number of times, for men anoint an unlimited number of times. He anoints with (a stalk) which has a
knowing, the leader, be leader; let Brhaspati recite hymns and rejoicing,' he says; that is Agni's hymn,
tawny steeds, who art drunk by Indra, who hast sweetness, and who art invited, I invited eat.
2. Here (shall be) the gathering place of the waters, here the dwelling-place of the sea! In the midst of a pond our
me a share in the sacrifice, and I will not have designs against your cattle. He poured out for him the
the abode of Nirrti; verily he propitiates Nirrti in her own abode. He places (them) over against the sling,
14 The wrath of Brahmanaspati according to his will had full effect when he would do a mighty deed.
12 Hymn-singing, seeking water, they, praising, have danced about the spring.
he closes with a Tristubh, the Tristubh is power and strength; verily he establishes the sacrifice on power
1. SING out the pious at your sacrifices to move with adorations Earth and HeavenThe Holy Singers, whose unmatched devotions, like a tree's branches, part in all directions.
I give full many a thousand to the worshipper, what time the Somas and the lauds have made me glad.
6 The Babe whom they who strengthen Law have generated fair to see,
The holy singers, O refulgent kindled God! arrangers, call on thee to come 6 Shine, Most Resplendent! blaze, send bliss unto the folk, and to thy worshipper
worse, that is (the origin) of the 'bad illness'; because he got it from his wives, that is (the origin) of the
Give mental power to him who sings the sacred song, and hearken, Strong Ones, to the master ofthe
5 When, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, mortals bethink them not of sacrificing,
him who is ill, the cups are breaths; verily he frees his breaths from pain, and even if his life is gone, yet
25. Anointed, ornamented, and well equipped, go away, carrying every misfortune! Know, O spell, thy maker, as a
Bright Usas was afraid of Indra's slaughtering bolt: she went upon her way and left her chariot there.
What time, O Hero, o'er the sea thou broughtest, in safety broughtest Turvasa and Yadu.
9 The men, the people magnify that Indra with their Slina. songs,
Both Bays, both spotted mares are now thy fellows, and to the ass's pole is yoked the Charger.
1. Now Morning with her earliest light shines forth, dear daughter of the Sky:
burst through in our favor. May the Devas always augment our family-welfare indeed. May the
3 He knows, a God himself, to guide Gods to the righteous in his home:
So may we know thee as thou art a giver boundless in thy gifts!
O Satakratu, biting cares devour me, singer of thy praise, as rats devour the weaver's threads. Mark
4 Let us sing praises to the Gods: sing loudly, send ye the Soma forth for mighty riches.
The streams, the waters flow for him with fatness: to him this guerdon ever yields abundance.
This is a great moment in the Bhagavad Gita, when for the first time Arjun, who is Shree Krishna’s friend and cousin, requests him to be his Guru. Arjun pleads to Shree Krishna that he has been overpowered by kārpaṇya doṣh, or the flaw of cowardice in behavior, and so he requests the Lord to become his Guru and instruct him about the path of auspiciousness.All the Vedic scriptures declare in unison that it is through the medium of a Spiritual Master that we receive divine knowledge for our eternal welfare:tadvijñānārthaṁ sagurumevābhigachchhet samitpāniḥ śhrotriyaṁ bhramhaniṣhṭham (Muṇḍakopaniṣhad 1.2.12) [v4]“To know the Absolute Truth, approach a Guru who is both a knower of the scriptures and is practically situated on the platform of God-realization.”tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śhreya uttamamśhābde pare cha niṣhṇātaṁ brahmaṇy upaśhamāśhrayam(Bhāgavatam 11.3.21) [v5]“Seekers of the Truth should surrender themselves to a Spiritual Master who has understood the conclusion of the scriptures and taken complete shelter of God, leaving aside all material considerations.”The Ramayan states:guru binu bhava nidhi tarai na koī, jauṅ biranchi sankara sama hoī. [v6]“Not even the most elevated of spiritual aspirants can cross over the material ocean without the grace of the Guru.” Shree Krishna states this himself in the Bhagavad Gita in verse 4.34: “Learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him with reverence and render service unto him. Such an enlightened Saint can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”To demonstrate the need for accepting a Guru to gain knowledge, Shree Krishna himself took this step. In his youth, he went to the hermitage of Sandipani Muni to learn sixty-four sciences from him. His classmate, Sudama, remarked regarding this:yasya chchhando mayaṁ brahma deha āvapanaṁ vibhośhreyasāṁ tasya guruṣhu vāso ’tyanta viḍambanam(Bhāgavatam 10.80.45) [v7]“O Shree Krishna, the Vedas are like your body, manifested from the knowledge that you possess (hence, what requirement do you have for making a Guru). Yet, you too pretend you need to learn from a Guru; this is only your divine leela (pastime).” Shree Krishna is in fact the first Guru of the world, because he is the Guru of Brahma, the first-born in this material world. He performed this leela for our benefit, to teach by his example that we souls, who are under the influence of Maya, will need a Guru to dispel our ignorance. In this verse, Arjun takes the step of surrendering to Shree Krishna as his disciple, and requests his Guru to enlighten him regarding the proper course of action.
Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth and heaven as with an axle.
Three bodies hast thou which the Gods delight in: with these protect our hymns with care unceasing.
ruler of the universe, the lusty bull dwells upon the earth.
4. The plants that spread forth, those that are busby, those that have a single sheath, those that creep along, do I
Invoke you, only you, the Lords of twofold wealth, you prompt to hear, we bards, O Indra-Varuna.
18 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the men of old,
5 Strew, O ye wise, the sacred grass that drips with oil, in order due,
17 May Waters gathered near the Sun, and those wherewith the Sun is joined,
5 Be this our ancient bond of friendship with you and with Angirases here who speak of Vala.
3 Bright Usas, when thy times return, all quadrupeds and bipeds stir,
2. O thou (plant) with erect leaves, lovely, do thou, urged on by the gods, full of might, drive away my rival, make
He honours it with a verse addressed to Varuna; verily he honours it with its own deity.
11 Come hitherward to us with teams of horses, the highest and the midmost and the lowest.
56. Thee here we hand over to the southern direction, to Indra as sovereign lord, to the serpent that is striped
theologians say, 'Mitra appropriates the well-performed part of the sacrifice, Varuna the ill-performed;
2 He who like Savitar the God, true-minded protecteth with his power. all acts of vigour,
25 Now Srutakaksa sings his song that cattle and the steed may come,
Eastward the ladle goes that brings all blessing, praising the Godswith homage and oblation.
potsherds; to the All-gods, saviours from evil, on twelve potsherds; to Anumati an oblation; to Agni,
As he ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels pressed close on Mudgalani.
11 They who are borne by rapid steeds, drinking the meath that gives delight,
Agni, the pure; in that he offers to Agni, the purifying, thereby he bestows health upon him; in that (he
21. When as a swan he rises from the water he does not withdraw his one foot. If in truth he were to withdraw it,
fold is food; verily he places food on the south; therefore with the right food is eaten. 'Thou art the
The good thing which the husband and wife win with the milk admixture;
5 To deathless Jatavedas, meet for praise, adored, with sacred oil,
1. BEFRIEND us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra and Varuna who receive oblations!
5 Wise God, win for us things that are all-goodly, and let the prayers, we pray today be fruitful.
Indra who shone together with the Heroes begot the song, the fire, and Sun and Morning.
strengthening (bricks); verily he makes concord for him with cattle and he becomes possessed of cattle.
6 Indra hath yoked his Bays, the Asvins' car is horsed, Brhaspati hath brought the Cow of every hue.
10. The Sage of heaven whose heart is wise, when laid between both hands, with roars, gives us delightful
10 Send to our offerings which thyself thou balmest the Companies of Gods in ordered season.
Go, and Ayus. The Jyotis is this (earth), the Go the atmosphere, the Ayus yonder (sky); verily they
Kind, with the Rudras, be the Healer Rudra, and, with the Dames, may Tvastar kindly listen.
(metre). The Gayatri is brilliance and splendour; verily he bestows brilliance and splendour on himself.
5. Indra! thy friend, when fair of form and rich in chariots, steeds, and kine,
5 He hath come, chosen bearer, and is seated in man's home, Brahman, Agni, the Supporter,
8 Who with their bright beams spread them forth over the ocean in their might
4 The well with mouth of stone that poured a flood of meath, which Brahmapaspati hath opened with
Friend of the homestead, thou hast lightened mortals: carborne thou goest to the Gods, fulfilling.
Best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly yearn for you.
The song invoketh both Immortal Asvins far-reaching, born of old, great WonderWorkers.
7 As down the steep slope of a river to the vale, drawn from the Steer the swift strong draughts have
5 Come to us, Heroes, Vajas and Rbhuksans, glorified for the sake of mighty treasure.
half-years he causes Agni to increase [5], with the seasons the year. 'Illuminate all the quarters of the
2 With reverence and fair praise will I bring hither, for sake of strength, exhaustless Earth and Heaven.
Mitra and Varuna with their own share; verily they by day and night make Parjanya rain for him. The
As, in the morning of its life, the mothers lick the new-born calf.
3. Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy strength enter thou Indra's throat.
d In the eastern quarter may the gods, the priests, make (me) bright; in the southern [1] quarter may the
Agni and Soma, shall enjoy great strength, with offspring, all his life.
hundreds; Rudra's arrow, the missile of the gods, flies abroad: reverence be to it, in whatever direction from here
15 Purified for the feast of Gods, go thou to Indra's special place,
the penis; the Apsarases with the testicles; the purifying with the anus; the strainer with the two Potras;
9 Flow on for the God's banquet, Soma, as a Steer, and enter Indra's heart, the Soma's reservoir.
food. 'Honour to thy heat, thy blaze', he says, for paying honour they wait on a richer man; 'may thy
14 A mighty splendour rests upon her bosom: bearing ripe milk the Cow, unripe, advances.
g With thy top graze not the sky, with thy middle harm not the atmosphere, with earth be united.
Homage to Gods! Homage commands and rules them. I banish even committed sin by homage
4 So now must thy great deed be lauded as of old, when for the Angirases thou openedst the stall,
daughter; by her drive away my enemies; breath, cattle, and life shall give them a wide birth!
2 As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we ascend. him as a ship. for safety.
1. With a firmly founded stable, with wealth, with well-being, with the name of that which is born on a lucky day do
blessing of the sacrifice. If one were to say, 'That indeed (etád u) hath been glorious, O sky and earth'
4 Come to the sacrifice, Agni and Indra come to the offerer's house who hath the Soma.
'Homage to Agni, slayer of Makha', he says. These gods cause ruin at the Sadas. He, who knowing them
f Thou art of gods the most firmly jointed, the most richly filled,
7 As an axe fells the tree so be slew Vrtra, brake down the strongholds and dug out the rivers.
nose; they walk round on all sides, to smite away the Raksases. Now the offerings the gods made on the
atmosphere, having strengthened thyself with their brahma and payas (spiritual and physical essence) do thou
And, Mightiest! roaring! boldly rent in pieces things that were firmly fixed and never shaken.
women) with dishevelled hair, they that wail lugubriously, shall not wail over thee!
2 Indu, with thee for his confederate, Indra swiftly with might pressed down the wheel of Surya.
He stays apart the two confronting bowls; he sings lauds in the potent Soma's joy when he hath drunk.
16 Giver of kine, may we not miss thy gracious gifts: let us not rob thee of thine own.
whole sacrifice the gods went to the world of heaven; Manu laboured with the cooked offering; the Ida
1. WITH wisdom I present these lively praises of Bhavya dweller on the bank of Sindhu;
14. May I beget honey for myself; may I obtain honey for myself! Bringing milk, O Agni, I have come:. endow me
14. May the Earth and the Heaven be auspicious and troublefree for you. May the sunshine bring you blessings.
2. May the brave man, if full of zeal he serve and kindle Agni's flame,
All lordship, and all strength, O thou that art worthy of sacrifice
Rivers are ye with wings that fly: keep far whatever brings disease.
them constant, departing not. Now one fire is piled with bricks, one with cattle. 'Thou art composed Of
Naksatra, Mitra the deity; Rohini the Naksatra, Indra the deity; the two Viçrts the Naksatra; the fathers
2. As the elephant directs his steps after the steps of the female, as the heart of the lusty male hankers after the
31. The offspring of them that fashion the spell, practise magic, or plot against us, crush thou, O spell, leave none
33 On flows the King of rivers and the Lord of heaven: he follows with a shout the paths of Holy Law.
54. Mighty am I, 'Superior' (uttara) by name, upon the earth, conquering am I, all-conquering, completely
Him in whose keeping is the well-loved singer never do Gods or mortals stay or hinder.
the hymn the Arkya (Saman and Çastra) is produced; he eats food, and his son is born to eat food, for
11 Yea, even this great Pair of Worlds trembled in terror at thy wrath,
In synods must be sung the car which Vibhvan wrought: that which ye favour, Gods! is famed among
offspring; he offers (the victim) facing north on the south side against the stream of the waters, to
a Let the Vasus press thee with the Gayatri metre; go thou to the dear place of Agni.
3 Three are thy times of life, O Jatavedas, and the three mornings are thy births, O Agni.
10. (May) I (be) unharmed, with cows unharmed, long-lived, with undiminished men! This varana-amulet shall
Whilst thou, the Friend of man, guardest each sacrifice with thine own power, Most Youthful One.
1. URGED On, the Father of the Earth and Heaven hath gone forth like a car to gather booty,
5. Arise, thou divine person, O Arbudi, together with thy army! Crushing the army of tlie enemy, encompass them
5 Thou, moving beauteously in visibly pregnant ones, snatching with trees the branching plant that
melted butter; with ghee do thou anoint all its limbs! I prepare for myself a road that leads to the Fathers in the
7 May Earth restore to us our vital spirit, may Heaven the Goddess and mid-air restore it.
Since Arjun had become fearful and beseeched that the cosmic form be hidden, Shree Krishna now pacifies him by explaining that there is no need to be scared. He had bestowed a vision of his universal form by his grace, not as a form of punishment, but because he was very pleased with Arjun. He uses hyperbole as a figure of speech to stress how rare it is to see the universal form, by saying that Arjun is the first one to see it. Although Duryodhan and Yashoda were also given a glimpse of the universal form, it was not to this intensity, depth, and magnitude.Shree Krishna bestowed this divine vision upon Arjun with the help of his Yogmaya energy. This is the divine all-powerful energy of God. He has referred to it in many places, such as verses 4.6and 7.25. It is by virtue of this Yogmaya energy that God is kartumakartum anyathā karatum samarthaḥ “He can do the possible, the impossible, and the contradictory at the same time.” This divine power of God also manifests in the personal form and is worshipped in the Hindu tradition as the Divine Mother of the universe, in the form of Radha, Durga, Lakshmi, Kali, Sita, Parvati, etc.
7 He, Soma Pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the wave of voice, our songs and praises.
And what so ye have made, Indra and Soma, steeds bear as 'twere yoked to the region's car-pole.
23 We call on thee as such, as one who hears, as Jatavedas, one,
2.6.11.4 Mantra 4: The Peculiarities of the Second Half of the Rite
There the staff-bearer found the golden treasure. These things did Indra in the Soma's rapture.
6 Mitra, Varuna, ye whose ways are firm - a Power that none deceives-,
buying (of the Soma) falls for them on the Ekastaka; verily they do not waste the Ekastaka. In their case
That, separate from his Mother, Two support him, closely-united, twins, here made apparent.
Born in our houses, Youthful, joy-bestower, he now becomes the central point of brightness.
Indra and Vayu is drawn on the ninth day, the abode of the Agrayana. The fifth day is the abode of the
May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with
7 May we not commit sin against the Lord who has compassion even for those who commit sin.
Whereby we may extend ourselves ever over the folk; and send us strength that shall deserve the
15 There is not, in our knowledge, one who passeth Indra in his strength:
gods to know whether it is the end or not?' He goes round the Agnidh's altar to the north and offers the
17 He looked upon the Asvins, as an axearmed man upon a tree:
he thus invokes a blessing, to prevent misfortune, Having caused (him) to call out, he says, 'Utter the
The milkers of the sacrifice have sung to him: Lord of three heights, thou shinest brightly o'er the
Men skilled in holy hymns, pure, with the hues of fire, have sung them with their lauds to thee.
6. May you rise and not fall. O man! May you be granted long life. May you achieve success in your occupation.
thunderbolt within the morning pressing. 'The hymn hath been uttered', he says in response at the
to. draw them in the Prsthya (rite), the Prsthas would destroy the sacrifice in front; if he were to draw
26 When Vrtra, stayer of the floods, thou si"est, Thundeicr with might,
Therewith send wealth: to us with full enjoyment, a hero son and gifts of kine and horses.
2 Inhabiting one dwelling-place in common, strong Stallions and the Mares have come together.
6 Thou mountest to the height of heaven, O Soma, seeking steeds and kine,
6. That army yonder o( the enemy, that comes against us fighting with might, do ye, O Maruts, strike with planless
3 Promptly we woke to welcome thee, O Usas, Daughter of the Sky,
offspring, with cattle, with pairings. He offers to the kindling-sticks as many, to Tanunapat as one, and
n Fill the world, fill the hole, do thou sit down auspicious;
Yog is the union of the soul with God. The opposite of Yog is bhog, which means engagement in sensual pleasures. Indulgence in bhog violates the natural laws of the body, and results in rog (disease). As stated in the previous verse, if the body becomes diseased, it impedes the practice of Yog. Thus in this verse, Shree Krishna states that by being temperate in bodily activities and practicing Yog, we can become free from the sorrows of the body and mind. The same instruction was repeated two-and-a-half millennium after Shree Krishna by Gautam Buddha, when he recommended the golden middle path between severe asceticism and sensual indulgence. There is a beautiful story regarding this. It is said that before gaining enlightenment, Gautam Buddha once gave up eating and drinking, and sat in meditation. However, after a few days of practicing in this manner, the lack of nourishment made him weak and dizzy, and he found it impossible to steady his mind in meditation. At that time, some village women happened to be passing by. They were carrying water pots on their heads that they had filled from the river nearby, and were singing a song. The words of the song were: “Tighten the strings of the tānpurā (a stringed Indian musical instrument, resembling a guitar). But do not tighten them so much that the strings break.” Their words entered the ears of Gautam Buddha, and he exclaimed, “These illiterate village women are singing such words of wisdom. They contain a message for us humans. We too should tighten our bodies (practice austerities), but not to the extent that the body is destroyed.” Benjamin Franklin (1706 – 1790), a founding father of the United States, is highly regarded as a self-made man. In an effort to grow his character, starting at the age of 20, he maintained a diary in which he tracked his performance related to the 13 activities he wanted to grow in. The first activity was “Temperance: Eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.”
Far from us, far away drive thou Destruction. Put from us e'en the sin we have committed.
The sages luminous in themselves have praised thee with their latest hymn. Now, Indra, yoke thy two bay steeds!
8. Great, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of the Three,
1. This barley they did plough vigorously, with yokes of eight and yokes of six. With it I drive off to a far distance
say, 'The gods who eat not the oblations are the bricks' [5]. He offers going round in order; verily he
Help us, O Maghavan, let thy favour aid us thus; drive away foes and enemies!
1. ENKINDLED, Pavamana, Lord, sends forth his light on, every side
Shine then to-day, rich Maid, on him who lauds thee, shine down on us the gift of life and offipring.
The deeds of him the mighty, deeds like Indra's, the manly one in whom the folk must triumph!
5 Ancient will be those creatures, whatsoe'er they be; with moons, with autumns, doors unclose
11 Ordained by Manu as our Priest, thou sittest, Agni, at each rite:
What, Child of Heaven, thou hast of nourishment for man, bestow thou on us to enjoy.
Like branches of a tree, Invoked of many manifold aids spring forth from thee, O Indra.
1. To him adorable, mighty, meet for synods, this strengthening hymn, unceasing, have they offered.
Breaks through e'en strongly-guarded wealth as Trta burst his way through reeds.
Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye Gods, protect us evermore with blessings.
The prayer is that the Sister may convey you, all praised, meath-drinkers! to support and strengthen.
Succour us with thine help and with tby wondrous thought. Most Mighty, finder of the way.
Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine
Spin out the ancient thread for him who sheds, with gifts, the Soma juice.
Yea, to the liberal mortal who remaineth at home, O Goddess Dawn, much good thou bringest.
5. The chanters with their pious song hurry on blithely as cows; at home are their children, and at home the cows
13 For, Indra, verily thou art the general treasure even of all .
3 Strong Steed art thou: go to the yearning Maidens with vigour, happily go to heaven and praises:
And when thou, Godlike One, dealest forth treasures, vouchsafe us, too, our portion of the riches.
To Indra who inspires the hymn cry Glory! and present the gift.
the Trivrt (Stoma); from the Trivrt the Rathantara; from the Rathantara Vasistha, the Rsi; with thee
1. STABLISHED for thee, to lend thee vital forces, Giver of wealth, Guard of his servant's body.
b He who piles the fire after announcing to Prajapati does not go to ruin. The horses should stand on
4 The mighty aid of you, the Great, Varuna, Mitra, Aryarnan,
upon him a divine [1] pair, for growth, for propagation. There is an oblation to Sinivali; Sinivali is
off the sacrifice for them; in that they won the wealth of the Asuras which was to be won (védyam), that
Of hero lineage, day by day, destroyer of our treacherous foes.
o Homage to him who draggeth, and to him who repelleth.
He must be called to give us seed and offspring, the Thunderer must he moved and sped to battle.
Borne on thy way as 'twere in fragments from both arms.
1. Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the Soma first.
with the seasons the year; verily; the year [2] they find support. From the Trayastrinças they go to the
2. From the hundred arteries which are distributed along thy limbs, from all of these do we exorcise forth the
Shree Krishna has taken the position of being Arjun’s teacher. It is natural for the teacher to inquire whether the student has grasped the subject or not. Shree Krishna’s intention of asking the question is that if Arjun has not understood, he is ready to re-explain or go into further details.
1. LIKE the Sun's glance, like wealth of varied sort, like breath which is the life, like one's own son,
The cry cometh to me, the voice of them to us;
Gods strengthened thee for work that must be glorified, Agni, while they made butter pure for sacrifice.
Guardeth the Seven-headed in the centre, guardeth sublime the Deities enjoyment.
2 Him, Maker of the sky, let stones wet with the Soma ne'er forsake,
1. WHOSO enkindles thee, with lifted ladle, and thrice this day offiers thee food, O Agni,
5 They ran to thee as mothers to their offspring: the clouds, like chariots, hastened forth together.
free thee from all evil and disease, (and) unite thee with life.
3 More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, when the son duly careth for his parents' line.
2 Both Gods and men obey this Ruler's order, Gods who are worshipped, men who yearn and worship.
Offered, beloved, approved, and consecrated,-such Charger do the Gods accept with favour.
Thou stablishest the two much-wandering Mothers, and bringest many deeds to their completion.
7 Ancient Invoker, meet for praise, beloved Agni, wise and strong,
is left on the place of sacrifice is mine.' Then one should not resort to a place of sacrifice. He said, 'Give
3. Like Atri, like Kanva, and like Gamadagni do I slay you, ye worms! With the incantation of Agastya do I crush
f O Agni, thou comest to the wave of the sky,
at - based on a thoughtful merger of numerous source Vedic documents.
Like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth, whereon, as in a lap, ye seat you firmly.
Indra, and it is this they sacrifice. To him who knows thus the sacrifice resorts.
4.6.57 Sukta 57 – Urine (Galasha) as a cure for Scrofulous Sores
1. PUT forth like a wide-spreading net thy vigour; go like a mighty King with his attendants.
g May he that filleth never miss of fullness. Let me not be parted with life.
g The Hotr hath sat him down in the place of the Hotr wise,
cake, he should say, 'Do thou recite for the Maruts'; having directed (the Agnidh), he should say, 'Utter
1. Hither hath come this amulet of parna-wood, with its might mightily crushing the enemy. (It is) the strength of
4 The new-born Vrtra-slayer asked his Mother, as he seized his shaft,
He who is about to engage in a conflict should offer an oblation to Aditi; Aditi is this (earth); verily in
offerings, increasing holy order; on the path of the moving ocean I offer all the days to Viçvakarman the
antelope skin; verily he afflicts with pain wild animals [2]; therefore of animals of even birth the wild
8 The Maruts' chariot, ever fain to gather glory, we invoke,
t The Raksas is cleared away, the evil spirits are cleared away.
2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through many nights,-this noble band of Maruts.
8 He makes him a most noble form of splendour, decking him in his home with milk and waters.
2 Praise ye, O men, and glorify Indra-Agni in the holy rites:
8 Well-skilled to use the weapons of his Father, Aptya, urged on by Indra, fought the battle.
May the fire for me, the cauldron, the beam, the sun, breath, the horse sacrifice, earth, Aditi, Diti, sky,
There is no sacrifice without a Saman. 'As we approach the sacrifice', he says; verily he yokes a Stoma
10 May all the Gods who strengthen Law, with Rtus, listening to our call,
Ye Youthful, make us famed among the people: hear, Mitra-Varuna, these mine invocations.
5 Indra, with all thy saving helps give us assistance, Lord of power.
third, he should breathe in; verily he unites inspiration with inspiration; verily he kindles him with the
Cattle attend the cooked offerings of him who has established a fire. The cooked offering is the Ida; it is
ancient seat', he says; verily in those he establishes them from whom he makes him to fall. With two
black one, it would be a funeral cow, and the sacrificer would be likely to die. If with one of both
Prajapati created the fire; it created ran away east from him; he cast the horse at it, it turned to the south;
Therefore vouchsafe us strength, O Strength-bestower. Win like a King: foes trouble not thy dwelling.
7 He, in whose mansion is the teeming Milch-cow, swells the Gods' nectar and cats noble viands.
5. As thou art cleansed, O wondrous steed, O Soma, thou hast entered, like
15 Holy Prdikusanu, winner of the spoil, one eminent o'er many men,
10. Here is the Soma ready pressed: of this the Maruts, yea, of this,
more the gods whose is a new dwelling. With him, when sacrifice is to be made on the next day, do the
23 Full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of lauds which, even of old, they sang you.
Factually, the objects of the world are made from Maya, the material energy of God. Energy is both one with its energetic and also different from it. For example, light is the energy of fire. It can be considered as different from the fire, because it exists outside it. But it can also be reckoned as a part of the fire itself. Hence, when the rays of the sun enter the room through a window, people say, “The sun has come.” Here, they are bundling the sunrays with the sun. The energy is both distinct from the energetic and yet a part of it.The soul too is the energy of God—it is a spiritual energy, called jīva śhakti. Shree Krishna states this in verse 7.5.Chaitanya Mahaprabhu stated:jīva-tattva śhakti, kṛiṣhṇa-tattva śhaktimāngītā-viṣhṇupurāṇādi tāhāte pramāṇa(Chaitanya Charitāmṛit, Ādi Leela, 7.117)[v19]“Lord Krishna is the energetic and the soul is his energy. This has been stated in Bhagavad Gita, Viṣhṇu Purāṇ, etc.” Thus, the soul is also simultaneously one with and different from God. Hence, those whose minds are fully absorbed in God-consciousness see the whole world in its unity with God as non-different from him. The Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam states:sarva-bhūteṣhu yaḥ paśhyed bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥbhūtāni bhagavatyātmanyeṣha bhāgavatottamaḥ(11.2.45)[v20]“One who sees God everywhere and in all beings is the highest spiritualist.” For such advanced spiritualists whose minds are completely absorbed in God-consciousness, the person making the sacrifice, the object of the sacrifice, the instruments of the sacrifice, the sacrificial fire, and the act of sacrifice, are all perceived as non-different from God.Having explained the spirit in which sacrifice is to be done, Lord Krishna now relates the different kinds of sacrifice people perform in this world for purification.
death who has come for help. Therefore in (the cup) for the wives for Tvastr also a drawing is made. He
3. Here (shall be) thy (life's) spirit, here thy inbreathing, here thy life, here thy mind! We rescue thee from the toils
Cleansing himself with stream of juice he shines forth yellow-hued and red, when with the praisers he
1. MORE beauteous than the beautiful, as Indra's bolt, this Soma, rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the
9 This day we pray with innocence in strewing grass, adjusting pressing-stones, and perfecting the
All holy Order's pathway they discovered he, full of knowledge, shared these deeds through worship.
3. For day and night, for the stars, for sun and moon, and for us prepare good weather, O king Sakadhûma!
5 O Soma, through thy might who art skilful and strong, these longing men,
supposed to be spoken by the disciple who has overheard the conversation, but its connexion with the
Or pressed among the Fivefold Tribes-Ano Bhadraha Kritavayo Yantu Vishwataha (Let noble thoughts come from every side) – Rg Veda
midst of the waters, as though standing in the ocean, the beneficent (floods, or the vigorous priests) cleanse
worlds. He shaves his hair and beard, he trims his nails. The hair and the beard are dead and impure
9 He makes the races of mankind like synods of the Beauteous One.
sacrifice. 'Thou art force; to the Pitrs thee! Quicken the Pitrs', he says; verily the gods and the Pitrs he
1. O Soma, for the feast of Gods, river-like he hath swelled with surge,
f Child of the waters, swift one, the towering onrushing wave most fain to win the prize, with it may he
sea,Beside that Indra when he smote down Vrtra stood his helpers, straight in form, mighty, invincible.
of cattle: reverence be to thee! Far from us shall go the jackals, evil omens, dogs; far shall go (the mourning
12. Hastening onward like the waves of waters our holy hymns are coming forth to Soma.
3 Like a good horse is he led out, when on the path that shines with light
11 Him, ministers, the Lord of heavenly treasure and all terrestrial wealth that earth possesses,
3 O Asvins rich in gifts, accept our sacrifice to prosper it:
Desire is an active craving for things not attained. Fueled with passion, one achieves and experiences the desired objects. But this causes attachment, which is a passive mental emotion that provokes the thirst for more. Therefore, when Shree Krishna states kāma-rāga-vivarjitam; He means “devoid of passion and attachment.” Explaining the nature of His strength, He says that He is the serene and sublime strength in people, which empowers them; to successfully fulfill their duties and responsibilities.When sexual activity is undertaken only for sensual pleasure and is devoid of any regulative principles, it is considered beastly or animalistic. Whereas, it is regarded, in line with the scriptural injunctions and not a contrary virtue, when carried out for procreation by a householder. Here, Shree Krishna has mentioned that within the institution of marriage, He is the controlled, virtuous, and well-intended sexual activity of a householder.
When, fighting for the sunlight, we invoke thee, O Hero, in the fray, in war's division.
21. That Dhâtar did fasten on: (then) he shaped the being. With it those that hate me do thou slay!
2. The powerful conqueror, invincible in war, him at whose birth the mighty ones,
4 Strong God! the folk at need put forth their vigour, striving together in the whirl of battle.
treasure hides it. To Agni Svistakrt he speaks aloud; it is as if one who has found a rich treasure is fain
7 Whoso with sacrifices toiling brings you gifts, and worships, sage and priest, fulfilling your desire,To him do ye draw nigh and taste his sacrifice. Come well-inclined to us unto our songs and prayer.
For he who is ill is separated from breath, the cup for Indra and Vayu is breath; verily he unites him with
May Maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hundreds of cattle and of steeds.
foulness of speech, that porridge with a hundred streams (of ghee), leading to heaven, has penetrated with might
the Udumbara with strength, the Gayatri with the metres, the Trivrt with the Stomas. b Ye are helpers;
Ila they made the teacher of the sons of men, what time a Son was born to the father of my race.
Yajus should not be performed,' they say: the apparatus should be collected and the Yajus performed, for
says thus. 'Of Mitra and Varuna', he says, for Mitra and Varuna set her in motion. 'The Brahman, god
breaths. 'Bhuh, Bhuvah, Suvar', (with these words) he puts down the naturally perforated bricks; the
7 Soma assumes white colour when he strives to gain: the bounteous Asura knows full many a
thus perform (the rite of) thirty-three days, mount openly upon the deities. As a great man who has
if turned away, those of the wild; he should speak a Yajus, he wins the brilliance that is in the snake, he
4 When Indra, wondrous strong, brought down the streams, the mighty waterfloods,
Over all living men he rules as Sovran, containing all as spokes within the felly.
a Thou art the queen, the eastern quarter; the Vasus, the deities, are thine overlords, Agni stayeth
extols. He who reviles purifies them, he who extols places food in them after they are purified. They win
Who with his glow in rapid course came hither to fill both worlds, well-wedded Dames, with treasure.
5 The Steed of Vata, Vayu's friend, the Muni, by the Gods impelled,
posts, therefore one wife does not find two husbands. If he desire of a man, 'Be a girl born to him', he
In His customary style, Shree Krishna now winds up the topic of the field and the knower of the field by summing up all that He has said. True knowledge is to know the distinction between the material kṣhetra (field of activity) and the spiritual kṣhetrajña (knower of the field). Those possessing such discriminative knowledge do not look upon themselves as the material body. They identify with their spiritual nature as souls and tiny parts of God. Hence, they seek the path of spiritual elevation and release from material nature. Then, by treading on the path of spiritual enlightenment, such persons of wisdom attain their ultimate goal of God-realization.
manner of Angiras; may the All-gods, common to all men, fill thee with the Anustubh metre, in the
1. True object of our hymns, Sage, watchful Soma hath settled in the press as they refine him.
4 The Gods enkindle thee their ancient messenger, - Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman.
7 Ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees; like buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed.
1. I release thee unto life by means of (my) oblation, from unknown decline, and from consumption. If Grâhi
8 When he unbars the spaces of the mountains, and quickens with his floods the water-torrents,
The Mighty Child who glides along the sacred grass, the undecaying Youth set in the midst of plants.
2. Incline thy body to the juice which suits thy godlike nature well:
16 The quail had invocated you, O Asvins, when from the wolf's devouring jaws ye freed her.
1. Him have I magnified, our Lord in common, guardian of your folk,
14 Night, well-nigh ended, at Rnancaya's coming, King of the Rusamas, was changed to morning.
second cross -breathing, the third inspiration. Having put down the first naturally perforated brick he
5 Thou art the Lord supreme o'er rest and energy, O Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.
world and by the Tryahas in this world. The three days are the Jyotis, Go, and Ayus. The Jyotis is this
4 For they are true, they cleave to Law, held holy among every race,
Come hither, borne by mares with many heroes, Lover of song! Steer! for the people's welfare.
2. Drink our libation, Lord of hymns! with streams of meath thou art bedewed:
Centre art thou, Vaigvdnara, of the people, sustaining men like a deep-founded pillar.
recourse to Agni as desire with his own share; verily he unites him with his desire; his desire comes to
its incisors it is more puissant than those with one row of incisors, by its hair than those with two rows;
1. SING forth to Indu, O ye men, to him who is purified,
powerful, overcoming; support the sky, make firm the sky, harm not the sky; for every expiration,
1. As with their voice from cloud they sprinkle treasure so are the wise man's liberal sacrifices.
are born from the thick side; he cuts off without confusion, to prevent confusion of the vital airs. He
which has entered the horse. 'By Prajapati must the fire be piled', they say; the horse is connected with
'Do thou lead him forward', (with these words) he puts on the kindling-sticks; that is as when one
his drinking of Soma is as it were let loose again [6]; (verily it serves) for prosperity. When practising
The holy singers, O enkindled radiant one, ordainers, call on thee to come.
Hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who seek the dwelling of the worshipper.
2 The fire well-kindIed sings aloud to greet her, and with their hymns the priests are chaming welcome.
g With one foot, two feet, three feet, four feet, five feet, six feet, seven feet, eight feet may she extend
1. Tossing about, the active ones came nigh to Indra at his birth,
3. Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laud-worthy, speeding through the region and the flood,
is performed with the Saman [3]; to the people (falls) the blessing of what (is performed) with the Rc;
by the first months what is done by the Rsis and by the gods; in that the Bhutechad Samans are used,
The swift ones favour him who purifieth this: with brilliancy they mount up to the height of heaven.
4 Fierce, quickly conquering, of surpassing vigour, he framed his body even as he listed.
and power. He touches the waters; the waters are medicine; verily he makes medicine.
4 Alone or many thou art worshipped, Manyu: sharpen the spirit of each clan for battle.
2 Our sires with lauds burst e'en the firmset fortress, yea, the Angirases, with roar, the mountain.
(he offers) an oblation in the house of the divider; the sacrificial fee is a black (ox). To Rudra (he offers)
4 Conquering bands upon the Warrior waited: they recognized great light from out the darkness.
11 The pressers purify this juice of thine, the Soma, for delight, and lofty fame
5 Favour ye this my laud, O Ganga, Yamuna, O Sutudri, Parusni and Sarasvati:
connexions himself. Agni desiring a share after being established assailed the offspring and cattle of the
Whereby the Strong, although our debts' exactor, drives in the distant mornings that we know not.
me', (with this hope) is the fire piled; the gods know him. 'For what good is the fire piled?' they say.
11 The Deities generated Vak the Goddess, and animals of every figure speak her.
7. Make glad with songs that Ram whom many men invoke, worthy hymns of praise, Indra the sea of
By thee do mortal men give sweetness to their drink. Bright art thou born, the embryo of the plants of
atone. These nights form two rows, the sacrificers are the Viçvajit, the first are sixteen with the Atiratra,
May I for me the stone, clay, hills, mountains, sand, trees, gold, bronze, lead, tin, iron, copper, fire,
1. FOR you I deck a harmless hymn, presenting the Soma juice to Varuna and IndraA hymn that shines like heavenly Dawn with fatness. May they be near us on the march and guard us.
Shine forth enkindled, Radiant One. Sit in the chamber of the Law, sit in the chamber of the food.
10. The takman that returns on each third day, the one that cominues without intermission, and the yearly one, ao
in the middle; verily they place a pair in the middle of the year [4] for procreation. On either side there is
finds support in the support of the twenty-onefold (Stoma), the Garhapatya; he who knows thus finds
constituents is the whole of the sacrifice; verily he sacrifices with the whole of the sacrifice, and he who
b Thou art taken with a foundation; to the god Savitr thee!
yonder Aditya; verily he says to Aditya, 'Guard this for me.'
28 Sole Lord in beauty meet for praise, O Vayu, dropping fatness down,
Sunk in the lap of all that moves and moves not, him who hath filled all luminous realms of heaven.
black neck to Agni, a brown one to Soma, and one with a black neck to Agni; the Brahman is connected
With amplest wealth thou fillest him, as round about the waters clearly seen afar fill Sindhu full.
3. That treasure of the Panis thou discoveredst. Thou with the Mothers deckest thee in thine abode, with, songs of
2, The warrior whom none may wound, the Soma-drinker ne'er o'erthrown,
He bathes in the waters; verily visibly he secures consecration and penance. He bathes at a ford, for at a
7 Through his wise insight Trita in the cavern, seeking as ever the Chief Sire's intention,
29 And lauds which strengthen thee for great bounty and valour, and exalt
4. From thy entrails, canals, rectum, and abdomen; from thy belly, guts, and navel I do tear out the disease.
b All this the Adhvaryu, as he begins, begins for the Udgatrs; 'May these gods who support breath
Wherefore do they address thee here, O Agni? Let these who have no weapons suffer sorrow.
To Heaven and Earth I offer this my homage, with food, O Agni, as I pray for riches.
6 So have I called you to our aid, even as the wise have called of old,
3. Though, Agni ordering the works and ways of both, as envoy of the Gods traversest both the realms.
manifold things as it were, he should offer in the forest (fire) groats with his hand; the forest (fire) is
17 He loves no more the men he loved aforetime: he turns and moves away allied with others.
4 O strong and Good, the voice of him who lauds you well cleaves to your car.
12 As the birds fly forth from their resting places, so men with store of food rise at thy dawning.
the village', they say; in that he refrains from those of the village, thereby be wins them; in that he eats
4 This is thine own. Thou drawest near, as turns a pigeon to his mate:
May we through this our song be happy gainers, God, of a fair and spacious habitation.
k Thou art speech, derived from Indra, destroying the foe [2]; do thou enter me with speech, with power
6 Exceeding strong in war he stays the chariot wheel, and, hating him who pours not, prospers him who
misfortune should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra [3], deliverer from tribulation, tribulation is
Arjun was blessed with the vision of the cosmic form of the Lord, which is rarely seen even by the greatest yogis. Shree Krishna told him that he was showing him the universal form because Arjun was his devotee and friend, and thus very dear to him. Sanjay also came to see that cosmic form because he was fortunate to be a part of the divine pastimes as the narrator. There are times when an unexpected grace comes our way. If we utilize it properly, we can progress rapidly in our sādhanā. Sanjay is repeatedly contemplating upon what he saw and flowing in the current of devotion.
5 So may the band of Maruts dwelling in the sky, the holy, come to us to sit on sacred grass;
The Raksases infest that sacrifice where the axle creaks; 'He hath cried', he repeats, to smite away the
1. May the wind bring to us joy. May the sunshine fill us with joy. May our days be filled with joy. May the nights
8 Eat, Indra, these oblations which approach thee: be pleased with food made ready and with Soma.
1. LET us invoke you both this day and after the priest is here with lauds when morn is breaking:
The bee, O Asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the maid carries it purified in her hand.
23 When he goes forth, ye Pair of Kings, for booty, speeding to war and praise to please the singer,I was the dearest sage of those about him,-let him lead these away and bring them safely.
8 The Mighty One, Lord of the people and their guest, the leader of their thoughts, devoted Friend of
d Homage to you hosts, and to you, lord of hosts, homage!
5. Strength may ye two, that are rich in strength, bestow upon him; milk may ye two, that are rich in milk, bestow
7 To Indra-Agni eeverent thoughts go forward from the holy task
For thee the nectar-yielding Cow pours all rich treasures forth as milk.
On the first day the Saman is that of Vikhanas; verily he does not leave the Jagati. On the second it is the
18 Further the holy thoughts of Vamadeva be thou a guileless Friend in fight for booty.
the sacrifice. He sprinkles transversely; therefore cattle move their limbs transversely, for support. 'For
7. With the drum and the skin of the antelope all the gods, that sway the battle, have scared away the enemies.
Lopamudrd, Agastya, and a disciple. Lopamudra is represented as inviting the caresses of her aged
2 Grown to their perfect strength greatness have they attained; the Rudras have established their
3 What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast Vrsakapi,
5 I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also act victorious:
8 I, in remembrance of thine ancient favour have sung my hymn in this our third assembly.
which is barren after one birth; he is unborn who being fit for prosperity obtains it not; the (cow) became
1. FOR holy lore of every sort, flow onward thou whom all men love.
Drive, Vayu, bring thine harnessed horses hither: drink the pressed Soma till it make thee joyful.
8 Ye, whom your artist skill hath raised to Godhead have set you down above in heaven like falcons.
In chapter 3, verse 3, Shree Krishna mentioned that there are two paths for attaining welfare—the path of contemplation and the path of action. Between these, he recommended to Arjun to follow the path of action. Again in chapter 5, verse 2, he declared it to be the better path. Does this mean that we must keep doing work all our life? Anticipating such a question, Shree Krishna sets the limits for it. When we perform karm yog, it leads to the purification of the mind and the ripening of spiritual knowledge. But once the mind has been purified and we advance in Yog, then we can leave karm yog and take to karm sanyās. Material activities now serve no purpose and meditation now becomes the means. So the path we must follow filters down to a matter of our eligibility and Shree Krishna explains the criteria of eligibility in this verse. He says that for those who are aspiring for Yog, the path of karm yog is more suitable; and those who are elevated in Yog, the path of karm sanyās is more suitable. The word Yog refers to both the goal and the process to reach the goal. When we talk of it as being the goal, we use Yog as meaning “union with God.” And when we talk of it as being the process, we use Yog as meaning the “path” to union with God. In this second context, Yog is like a ladder we climb to reach God. At the lowest rung, the soul is caught in worldliness, with the consciousness absorbed in mundane matter. The ladder of Yog takes the soul from that level to the stage where the consciousness is absorbed in the divine. The various rungs of the ladder have different names, but Yog is a term common to them all. Yog-ārurukṣhu are those sādhaks who aspire for union with God and have just begun climbing the ladder. Yog-ārūḍha are those who have become elevated on the ladder. So, how do we understand when one is elevated in the science of Yog? Shree Krishna explains this next.
destroying the foe; do thou enter me with speech, with power', he says; speech is derived from Indra;
2. Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, Soma, the best of sacred gifts, who, friend of man, hath run amid the
2. Roll onward from the press, O mighty one, effused, as kings, supporter of the tribes
6 To this our Soma-pressing, Indra-Agni, come ye prepared to show your loving-kindness,
Of Fathers whom we know and whom we know not: accept the sacrifice wellprepared with portions.
10. Sing to your Indra, mightiest Vritra-slayer, sing to the Sage the song that he accepteth!
Most mighty is thine ecstasy, most splendid is thy mental power.
to Vayu, the Sadas with one addressed to Indra. Thus he forms the sacrifice in accordance with the
Celestial-natured, he o'erwhelms with riches the devotee who keeps not back his treasure.
20 With Plenty for his true ally the active man will gain the spoil.
Savitar milked, as 'twere a restless courser, air, sea bound fast to what no foot had trodden.
And greedy Susna's magical devices nor left he any of their food remaining.
gathers) with the metres. (He gathers) with Gayatri verses for a Brahman, for the Brahman is connected
They lead, as 'twere, the Strong Horse forth, that it may rain: they milk the thundering, the never-failing
3 For, famous Indra-Agni, ye are dwellers in the midst of frays.
1. MAY our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy bounty, Thunderer.
They made it curds for him; that impelled (ahinot) him; verily curds (dadhi) has its name. The
impregnates the Nestr, the Nestr the wife. He causes the Udgatr to look (at the wife); the Udgatr is
To him exalted by the hymns and praises, ancient and modern, of the singing Rsis.
So wax thou by our food, O Excellent in strength. Quicken our thoughts that find out wealth.
And she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames.
9 Raise ye a mighty smoke, my fellow-workers! Ye shall attain to wealth without obstruction.
11 Swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rend and burn, O Hero Thunder-armed:
15 Pusan, the Lord of ample wealth, for firm alliance we elect.
11 O Soma Pavamana, find wealth for us not to be assailed,
4 Rich Daughter of the Sky, we all behold her, yea, all men look on Dawn as she is breaking.
20. He is the One who oversees what breathes and what does not
4 We two who rise and swell with billowy waters move forward to the home which Gods have made us.
2. While thou art cleansed, song-lover. bring comfort and vigourto the folk,
14 The plants of earth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this my speech;
f (Thou art) the course metre; the space metre; the health-bringing metre; the overpowering metre; the
For riches famous Agni, Purumilha and ye men! Agni to light our dwelling well.
offer to the seasons, he would cause strife with the gods; having offered the offering of first-fruits, he
4 I call the Twain whose deeds of old have all been famed in ancient days
The best men praise thee as the peer of Indra in strength, mid Gods, like Viyu in thy bounty.
2 Coming, it kills the unobserved; it kills them as it goes away,
gloss skin; with the Parakaça the interior; with hair the flies; Indra with
1. THOUGH, Indra, thou art called by men from east and west, from north and soutb,
16 Here this one God, the Lord of men, looks forth exceeding far and wide:
15 With these thou art united, Agni; yea thou, God of noble birth, surpassest them in majesty,
His feet He instantaneously reaches everywhere. He is the one who has created this whole universe.
With these your speedy coursers, Heroes, Asvins, come, ye Gods, come well-inclined to us.
10 Yea, to the Dear One's seat in homes of heaven and earth the Bay Steeds' Lord hath whinnied like a
Upon their shoulders rests as 'twere a warrior's spear and in their hand they hold a dagger and a ring.
reflected, 'If I shall offer, I shall offer what is raw; if I shall not offer, I shall make confusion in the
23. Arbudi and Trishamdhi shall pierce our enemies, so that, O Indra, slayer of Vritra, spouse of Sakî, we may
text. 'The lofty form of the bull shineth on high,' he says; the rain is in its lofty form; verily by the form
For in thyself, invincible God, thy statutes ne’er to be moved are fixed as on a mountain.
10 Winner of kine, Indu, art thou, winner of heroes, steeds, and strength
world of heaven turning away (from earth), who perform the Prsthas in succession. The Tryaha is re
Brahmans, as a wife rejected by her husband, shall recoil upon her fabricator, (and) his kin!
12 As keen supporter where great waters gather, light-shedder whom the brood rejoice to look on;
imprecations', he says; for that guards from imprecations and is impervious to imprecations. 'May the
away from the sacrifice [2], he followed the Adityas; they took refuge in (the cups) for two deities, them
6 In beams of morn he clothes him like the singer, and bright as Mitra with his splendour crackles.
I. MAY Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna consent, Aryaman, Vayu, Pusan, and Sarasvati,
4 They who with mighty strength o'erthrow like oxen difficult to yoke,
b Thou art holy order, thou art the holy order of holy order; thou art truth, thou art the truth of truth!
fails to hear what is good for him. He is the one who does not find the path chosen by successful
sacrifices with Soma; from him cattle depart. In that he mixes with milk (the Soma) for Mitra and
8 Ye gave a ain the vigour of his youthful life to tge sage Kali when old age was coming nigh.
4 Him whose three places that are filled with sweetness, imperishable, joy as it may list them,
Whatever the gods did at the sacrifice the Asuras did. The gods saw this great sacrifice, they extended it,
5. Reveal (all) forms, do not hide thy own self; moreover, do thou, O thousand-eyed (plant), look the Kimîdins in
5 The Brahmacari goes engaged in duty: he is a member of the Gods' own body.
11. Seize ye, and tear out in-breathing and outbreathing, O Nyarbudi (and Arbudi): deep-sounding groans shall
21 O Pavamana, drive away the danger, whether near at hand
14 He whom ye aid, O Deities, in battle, whom ye protect and rescue from affliction,
5 O Indra, with the Rbhus, Mighty Ones, pour down the Soma juice effused, well-blent, from both thy
3. About the holy place the Steer, true, guileless, noblest, hath sent forth,
calming. 'O ye slayers, come to the sacrifices', he says; that is according to the text. When the omentum.
21 Pass him who psours libations out in angry mood or after sin:
Established firm among mankind, the holy flame-crowned and fed with oil, the purifier!
they find support in the year. There are three hundred and sixty Stotriyas; so many are the nights of the
4. As the wild animals of the forest start in fear from man, thus do thou, O drum, shout against the enemies,
20 Not to be scorned, but like Dawns past and recent, O Indra, are thy favours and thy riches.
3. (The spell) that has been prepared by a Sadra, prepared by a Râga, prepared by a woman, prepared by
15. 'This is the way, O spell,' with these words do we lead thee. Thee that hast been sent Out against us do we
6 Thou, bright Juice, art Sustainer of the sky: flow, mighty, in accordance with true Law.
The theologians say, 'By the first day of the twelve-day rite what is it that the sacrificer takes from the
3. Among mankind many are thy libations, and many a time the pious sage invokes thee.
3 Agni, increase our means of life, increase the house and home of these,
(to the priests); the world of heaven is measured by a thousand; (verily it serves) for the winning of the
Who yoketh thee? Let him yoke thee. Let Visnu yoke thee, for the prosperity of this sacrifice, for my
unites the chief with the chief; verily also in the plants he establishes cattle. 'Give directions for the
so it serves) for the distinction of the quarters [1]. Now the Pankti is of five elements, the sacrifice is
He gains the power that brings success, for great is he.
20 Where, Bounteous Lords for whom the grass is trimmed, are ye rejoicing now?
abode of earth do thou approach Agni of the dust in the mode of Angiras', he says; verily he brings it
12 Vouchsafe us ever, as man needs, O Vasu, abundant wealth of kine for son and offspring.
h May the lord of consecration approve my consecration, the lord of penance my penance. Speedily may
1. HITHER, that I may live, I call unto the feast your wondrous car, thought-swift, borne on by rapid
6 Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who have sprung from Nahus' line adore him.
7 In splendid combats of the hosts, in glories where the fight is won.
10 When bither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, easy to be milked,
Faith at the setting of the Sun. O Faith, endow us with belief.
17 The turbid darkness fled, the heaven was sp, endid! up rose the bright beam of celestial Morning.
3. Purified for feast of Gods, go thou to Indra's resting-place,
He inundated thirsty plains and deserts, and milked the dry Cows of the mighty master.
2. The earth and heaven cling close to thy victorious might, as sire and mother to their child.
1. Now, verily, will I declare the exploits, mighty and true, of him the True and Mighty.
c Agni Angiras, thou who art in this earth, come with the name of Ayus. Whatsoever unapproached,
I. For Indra flow, thou Soma, on, as most inspiring drink, exceeding rich in sweets.
art everything, thou art of every life, the overcoming.' (So saying) the gods appropriated the force,
be in my strength.' If they omit the Saptadaça Stoma [1], his offspring is omitted, but he who offers the
5 Praise ye the Bull among the cows; for 'tis the Maruts' sportive band:
24 With Gayatri he measures out the praise-song, Sama with praise-song, triplet with the Tristup.
the Anvaharya connected with Prajapati; they seized it - then the gods prospered, the Asuras were
He hath brought down from heaven's most lofty summit the ocean of the rain, celestial waters.
11 The universe depends upon thy power and might within the sea, within the heart, within all life.
the foe who is superior to him; in that (he offers) to Agni, the overcomer, he repels thereby (the foe) who
12 By sacrifice which the Steeds' Lord ever visits, there make our dwelling rich in seed and offspring,
The Waters' Child, the blessed, the most mighty one, swift conqueror, and without a peer.
4 Thornless, Adityas, is the path, easy for him who seeks the Law:
11 Now to my words come quickly thou who knowest, O Son of Strength, with all who claim our
seized by Varuna should offer this black (beast) with one white foot to Varuna. Verily he has recourse to
1. O Usas, strong with strength, endowed witli knowledge, accept the singer's praise, O wealthy Lady.
sit with her relatives, until (her hair) drops from her head!
Agni, who are righteous, whose highest is Indra, whose king is Varuna, whose friend is Vata, whose
2.5.3.4 Mantra 4: The Srsti and Vyusti Bricks of the Fourth Layer
hundred, then is one time to stop. Man is of a hundred (years of) life and of a hundred powers; verily in
12 May he, the Priest resplendent, joyful, hear us, he with the radiant car and rapid horses.
Where Soma flows and sacrifice is ready, thither the streams of holy oil are running.
The thunderers roam through regions varied in their hues. Imperial Kings, bedew us with the milk of
Long stood they there before the task was ended: thou wast the master of the foemen's treasure.
b When they bear before him, covered with a garment and with wealth
Then let thy soul and mine be knit together, and as a loving husband take thy consort.
Thou whom the Falcon brought, bring, dainty viands, bestir thyself and send us wealth and booty.
joyful in this place, procuring for me full freedom from enmity!
1. COME to the juice that we have pressed, to Sorna, Indra, bleat with milk:
one should put both down in the first layer for him; verily these in accord pour seed for him; if a man
and redundant, for propagation; hairy by name is that metre of Prajapati, animals are hairy; verily he
On him have they laid splendour in abundance: dear to all men, bearer be he of riches.
1. To Indra from the heart the hymn proceedeth, to him the Lord, recited, built with praises;
2. This God who sees for thousands of mankind, the light, the thought of poets, and the Law,
With might thou clavest e'en the rock asunder, and foundest out the stable of the Milch-kine.
cake on eight potsherds to Agni of life; verily he has recourse to Agni of life with his own share; verily
Thou with the fair cheek, let thy Bay Steeds bring thee: gracious to us, he pleased with our oblation.
Who slew the Dragon putting forth his vigour, the demon lying there, He, men, is Indra.
8 Guardian of Law, most wise, he may not be deceived: three Purifiers hath he set within his heart.
16 Give us not up to those who, foes in ambuscade, are greedy for the wealth of him who sits at ease,
May thy praise help us, Mighty One, prompt Giver, to the full ample food which thou bestowest.
15 Seven fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers of fuel were prepared,
Around, on both sides thou encompassest the night: yea, thou, O God, art Mitra through thy righteous
When we lay claim to thy regard and gracious care, be thou to us a th rice- protecting friendly guard?
b Thou art the ash of Agni, thou art the dust of Agni.
The Aditya (cup) is those cattle; Agni is Rudra here; he draws after covering; verily he shuts off cattle
6 The bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands in bearded confidence;
and rain, to them ten eastwards, ten to the south, ten to the west, ten to the north, ten upwards; to them
6. He that pierces her ears is estranged from the gods. He thinks: 'I am making a mark (upon her),' (but) he
4 This thine own Soma rich in meath, O Indra, Steer for the Steer, hath flowed into the filter.
To us be born a son, and spreading offspring Agni, be this thy gracious will to usward.
8. The teacher fashioned these two hern spheres of the world, the broad and the deep, earth and heaven. These
Blazing before him strike him down, O Agni; let spotted carrion-eating kites devour him.
7 Still higher, at each strain of mine, thunder-armed Indra's praises rise:
He made paths easy to drive forth the cattle. Loud-breathing praises helped the Much-invoked One.
3 The aid most excellent of thee the Mightiest hitherward we call,
4. Thou that goest conquering as a conquering bull, with thee here, O asvattha, may we conquer our rivals!
over (it) with a branch of reeds and with Avaka plants; the waters are appeased; verily with them
6 So Indra is by lndu's power; e'en among Gods will it repel great treachery.
Thence by heaven-reaching songs he who bath pressed the juice invites thee with thy long-maned
have incisors on one side only and those which have incisors on both?' When he has repeated a Rc, he
Whereby with all their flood, the lucid rivers fill not one sea wherein they pour their waters.
4 I will send forth my songs in flow unceasing, like water from the ocean's depth, to Indra.
They seize the flying Steer at the stream's breathing place cleansing with gold they grasp the animal
16 With lauds I sing the Dragon born of floods: he sits beneath the streams in middle air.
14 Wherewith, when Sambara was slain, ye guarded well great Atithigva, Divodisa, Kasoju,
31 Thy spark is black and crackling, kindled in due time, O Bounteous, it is taken up.
The Rbhus, children of Sudhanvan, bright as suns, were in a year's course made associate with
2 The bowl made Indra swift to gather booty, the High, the Lofty, Youthful, Undecaying,
7 She who discerns the weak and worn, the man who thirsts and is in want
hungry in that year, for they take their food and strength; in whatever year the Sattra is imperfect, the
Come in one car, joy-givers! to the banquet, like the bolt binding pole and nave, come hither.
And Agni, he who blesseth all. The Waters hold all medicines.
that is this pairing; the amnion, embryo, the chorion, verily that is this [3] pairing. The Aditya (cup) is
3 Unharmed, best Cheerer, thou, O Indu, flowest on: thou, even thou thyself, art Indra's noblest food.
a May the kindling-stick of the quarters, that winneth the heaven, (Guard us) according to our hopes;
stepped apart along thee, O vigorous one; with curds and ghee may prosperity be increased; may wealth
O Usas, graciously answer our songs of praise with bounty and with brilliant
10 Even this sage hath come looking for succour even to Vata's docile harnessed horses.
5 Both Kings who never injure aught seat them in their supremest home,
1. To him, praiseworthy, sacred tones have sounded, Steer of the triple height, the life-bestower.
Established firm among mankind, the Holy, flame-crowned and fed with oil, the Purifier.
speak to the yagus-formulas and the invocations (to the gods): they shall deliver us from calamity!
17. (And also) the spooks with fourfold teeth, black teeth, testicles like a pot, bloody faces, who are inherently
So offering to you this draught of Soma, I make you this new hymn, Indra and Agni,
5 The Strong, the scatterers of the foe, Indra and Agni, we invoke;
man,Thou drivest all seductive fiends away from him whom, careful guard, thou keepest Brahmanaspati.
Giver of life, with wisdom help to opulence; strew not our home possessions far away from us.
4. (The disease) that renders a man deaf and blind--every disease of the head do we charm forth from thee.
When Shree Krishna appeared on the Earth, seemingly as a human being, he conducted himself in all ways and manners, appropriate for his position in society, as a member of the royal warrior class. If he had acted otherwise, other human beings would begin to imitate him, thinking that they must copy the conduct of the worthy son of the righteous King Vasudev. Had Shree Krishna failed to perform Vedic duties, human beings following his example would be led away from the discipline of karm, into a state of chaos. This would have been a very serious offence and Lord Krishna would be considered at fault. Thus, he explains to Arjun that if he did not fulfill his occupational duties, it would cause pandemonium in society.Similarly, Arjun was world-famous for being undefeated in battle, and was the brother of the virtuous King Yudhisthir. If Arjun refused to fulfill his duty to protect dharma, then many other worthy and noble warriors could follow his example and also renounce their prescribed duty of protecting righteousness. This would bring destruction to the world balance and the rout of innocent and virtuous people. Thus, for the benefit of the entire human race and the welfare of the world, Shree Krishna coaxed Arjun not to neglect performing his prescribed Vedic activities.
2 Shining to him who leaves heaven's regions undisturbed, which to his sheen who is beneath show
6 Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, Indra hath earned his name of Vrtra-slaycr.
Puronuvakya has the foe for its divinity; verily the blessing of his sacrifice falls to his foe [4]. If he
from Rudra [4]. (The stone) for pressing out the Upançu (cup) is this Aditya Vivasvant; it lies round this
5 Him who is sung aloud by recent sages, like a ripe-fruited tree, a scythe-armed victor,I, like a bridegroom thinking of his consort, call hither Indra, him invoked of many;
Whether by faith, or by lack of faith-that is, those which have no horns-both indeed were prosperous,
6 While other men than we with milk chase him as hunters chase a deer,
8 Ye Sovrans of the Forest, both swift, with swift pressers press to-day
priestly class; therefore the Brahman is the chief. The chief he becomes who knows thus. He proclaims
4 Bold, to your famous Soma I call the fair-visored God for aid,
4 Him noblest and most youthful, richly worshipped guest, dear to the men who offer gifts,
10 Him who advances them to wealth, sends light to lead them in the war,
Bear us beyond misfortune ere we be oppres. sed. the man who knows the land directs the man who
12 Thy spirit, that went far away to all that is and is to be,
1 WHY hath the Best, why hath the Youngest come to us? Upon what embassy comes he? What have
And Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, have with their power filled full the mighty
5 Flow on thy way, Most Active, thou. fill full the mighty heavens and earth,
1. Press the soma, ye priests, and rinse it (for renewed pressing), in behalf of Indra who shall listen to the song of
What count ye truth and what untruth? Where is mine ancient call on you? Mark this my woe, ye Earth
5 Stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthened: with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle.
e In that, when born, O Agni, thou didst survey the worlds,
In the previous nine verses, Shree Krishna explained the constituents of work and showed that each of three constituents fall in three categories. Now he explains the two factors that impact the quality and quantity of work. They not only propel action but also control and direct it. These are the intellect and determination. Buddhi is the faculty of discrimination that distinguishes between right and wrong. Dhṛiti is the inner determination to persist in accomplishing the work undertaken, despite hardships and obstacles on the way. Both are of three kinds in accordance with the modes of nature. Shree Krishna now discusses both these faculties and their three-fold classifications.
a portion of the butter, and to Brhaspati an oblation (be offered); in that there is (an offering) on eleven
says, for atonement. They bring forward this Soma, it rests with Agni, they in uniting overpower the
Vamadevya, is cattle; verily he invokes cattle with the atmosphere. 'The Brhat is invoked with the sky',
Soma, the morning and midday oblations; therefore at the third oblation they pour out the dregs of the
2 With that well-formed most wide-extending palate, wherewith thou ever drinkest streams of
25 So, glad and joyful in thine heart, do thou, God, Vayu, first of all
Udgithas are similar for the priests, the Udgitha for the Udgatrs, [5], the Rces and the Pranavas for the
6 Gathered together in that highest ocean, the waters stood by deities obstructed.
Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclosed the stable filled with cattle.
1. To Indra flow these running drops, these Somas frolicsome in mood.
power. In that Agni when established does not prosper, (it is that he is) desiring a greater portion; in that
Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.
15. The Gandharvas and Apsaras, the serpents and the gods, holy men and (deceased) Fathers, the visible and
A Steer of brilliant splendour, thou art lighted well at sacred rites.
9 Women for weapons hath the Dasa taken, What injury can his feeble armies To me?
morning, verily he obtains the days and nights, and making them into bricks piles them up. He offers ten
1. From thy eyes, thy nostrils, ears, and chin--the disease which is seated in thy head--from thy brain and tongue I
He will, when supplicated, bring him blessing: he hath brought all, food, strength, a happy dwelling.
alone is the reason why the Vedi is so called. The Asuras [3] indeed at first owned the earth, the gods
Mitra beholdeth men with eyes that close not. To Mitra bring, with holy oil, oblation.
13 May Heaven and Earth, the Mighty Pair, bedew for us our sacrifice,
the silent offering; in that silently he performs the libation of ghee, he takes away the sacrifice of his foe.
Agni is connected with the Gayatri; verily he gathers all the extent of Agni. 'Sit thou, O Hotr', he says;
something else the beginning. He sprinkles clarified butter with the dipping-ladle to proclaim the
Thence, as Law bids, departs the Tribes' Companion having collected men with no compulsion.
Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. With Vasat! have they come, with hands uplifted, with
He who purchases King Soma after making it go to the world of lordship, becomes lord of his own
The Universal Gods have brought me safely. The cry was heard, Behold, Dubsasu cometh!
10 For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of our weal,
Indra, when he hath drunk Soma-nicath drawn by them, waxes in strength, is famed, is mighty as a
No swimmer, Steer, he presses through the waters, and to his place accordant mortals bear him.
That we may gain wealth with full store of heroes, each day more famous, and with troops of children.
25 Proclaim in our assemblies what deeds, new and ancient, far away,
Ukthyas within are the body; Prajapati in such guise touches truth with the Sattra, truth is the breaths;
16 Arise! the breath, the life, again hath reached us: darkness hath passed away and light approacheth.
8 May we, O Vrtra-slayer, O Hero, find this thy newest boon, Longed-for, and excellent, thou who art
31 O Indra, strong is this thy car, and strong are these Bay Steeds of thine:
11 Lances are on your shoulders, anklets on your feet, gold chains are on your breasts, gems, Maruts,
Glowing like flames of fire, impetuous in career, blowing the wandering raincloud, have disclosed the
1. When the stars made Sakadhûma their king they bestowed good weather upon him: 'This shall be his
Yea, bring thou near us from the air's mid-region strength, on thy car, and wholesome food, O Hero.
2. A home is made for thee to dwell in, Indra: O much-invoked one, with the men go thither!
4 Agni and Soma, famed is that your. prowess wherewith ye stole the kine, his food, from Pani.
Thereafter were the regions born. This sprang from the Productive Power.
15. He that plans to harm thee with sorceries, with (unholy) consecrations and sacrifices--him beat thou back, O
1. VENOMOUS, slightly venomous, or venomous aquatic worm,Both creatures, stinging, unobserved, with poison have infected me.
17 The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, of Pavamana, King!
Raksases through Soma, the king, and making themselves active went to the world of heaven, to prevent
He will not die, nor shall we die: his path is far: he whom Bay Horses bear hath turned thee to sweet
Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the water croak, as frogs from out the water
1. Agni grows bright for Indra: he shines far resplendent in the sky:
Viands attend the car that beareth Heroes, your car, ye Sovran Pair, Indra and Vayu.
earth', he says; these deities first gathered him together; verily with them he gathers him together. 'Thou
Of black necks and white throats-e Those who of black necks and ruddy,
7 He, whose two red Steers, seeking goodly pasture, plying their tongues move on 'twixt earth and
6 He is the buttress of the heavens, supporter of earth, and in his hand are all the people.
Or in the rivers' compass, or in the abode of ample heaven.
Oblations meant for you had been made ready; these have we set aside: for this forgive us.
48. The earth holds the fool and holds the wise, endures that good and bad dwell (upon her); she keeps company
11. Gold-hued and lovely in his course through tangles of the wooli he flows:
Padas, the morning pressing is connected with the Gayatri; verily with the Gayatri he places the
down on the east, pointing west; five on the west pointing east; therefore seed is impregnated in front,
9. First, Indra! Agni! hath this Maid come footless unto those with feet.
3. Every tree thou dost climb, like a wench lusting after a man. 'Victorious,' 'firmly founded,' 'saving,' verily, is thy
Rājasic happiness is experienced as a thrill that arises from the contact between the senses and their objects, but the joy is as short-lived as the contact itself, and leaves in its wake greed, anxiety, guilt, and a thickening of the material illusion. Even in the material realm, for meaningful accomplishment, it is necessary to reject rājasic happiness. As a reminder to steer him away from immediate but misleading joys, India’s first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, used to keep these lines from the poem, Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening, on his desk: The woods are lovely, dark, and deep, But I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep, And miles to go before I sleep. The path to lasting and divine bliss lies not in indulgence, but in renunciation, austerities, and discipline.
6 With hands that shed no blood, guarding the pious, whom, Varuni3, ye save amid oblations.
unison with the gods, the lower and the higher', he replied; to both (the sets of) gods, the lower and the
They first perform the Jyotistoma; verily by it they find support in this world. They perform secondly
Wherewith ye bring delicious honey to the bees,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
crevices, for distinction; therefore people depend on the forest. 'May our songs, O lover of song', he
8. May Vatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwelling place!
2. Like a capacious car hath it been harnessed, the mighty, to acquire abundant treasures.
to the assembly make an offering to Indra and Agni on eleven potsherds. Verily Indra and Agni he has
1. To help and favour Vatsa now, O Asvins, come ye hitherward.
7 Not often have we sinned against you secretly, nor, Vasus, have we openly provoked the Gods.
6 Him as he lay there huge in length extended, still waxing in the gloom which no sun lightened,
Master of present and of future life, the maidens' lover and the matrons' Lord.
6 Root of wealth, gathering-place of treasures, banner of sacrifice, who grants the suppliant's wishes:
6 So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the woman back again.
In this verse, Shree Krishna has said that it is His energy which has brought about the appropriate physical conditions for life to exist on planet earth. Here,gāmmeans earth, andojasāis energy. Like all other celestial bodies, the earth is also a big mass of matter. But God has made it habitable, so that, it can sustain life.Ever wondered, why ocean water is so salty? God could have made the oceans full of freshwater, but it would have become a breeding ground for diseases. Due to the high salt content of the ocean water, many disease-causing microorganisms cannot survive in it, thereby protecting life.Similarly, several such amazing phenomena make earth inhabitable to a variety of species, of both movable, and static living beings. Nobel laureate and famous American scientist, George Wald has written in his book, A Universe that Breeds Life: “If anyone of the considerable number of the physical properties of our universe were other than they are, then life, that now appears to be so prevalent, would be impossible, here or anywhere.”Shree Krishna also says that the moonlight gets its nourishing properties from Him. And it is the ambrosial nectar of the moonlight that nourishes the entire plant life, i.e. fruits, vegetables, grains, herbs, etc.
22 This God, with might, when first he had his being, with Indra for ally, held fast the Pani.
9. Fierce Indra, verily, put might into thee, O lord of the forest! Dispersing all diseases, slay thou the Rakshas, O
Slay not our heroes in the fury of thy wrath. Bringing oblations evermore we call to thee.
unable to lay on their arrows, Âditya (the sun) shall send their missiles astray, and Kandramas (the moon) shall
to Vaiçvanara; in that there is (an offering) on eight potsherds, he purifies him with the Gayatri, with
In thee, O Son of Strength, all Gods are centred. Indra art thou to man who brings oblation.
They being young at first showed visibly distinct the Creature that is half-concealed and half-exposed.
30 If one should ask thee, Where is he who sacrificed? Whither lookest thou?
various customs, but only as regards water are they of one purpose [3]; if he desire of a man, 'May he be
worlds; (verily it serves) to keep apart these two worlds. Again the Viraj has ten syllables, the Viraj is
Those influenced by sattva are equipped with a measure of purity, virtue, knowledge, and selflessness. Hence, their actions are performed with a relatively pure intention and the results are uplifting and satisfying. Those influenced by rajas are agitated by the desires of their senses and mind. The intention behind their works is primarily self-aggrandizement and sense-gratification for themselves and their dependents. Thus, their works lead to the enjoyment of sense pleasures, which further fuels their sensual desires. Those who are predominated by tamas have no respect for scriptural injunctions and codes of conduct. They commit sinful deeds to relish perverse pleasures, which only result in further immersing them in delusion.
18 If I, O Indra, were the Lord of riches ample as thine own,
follows along with the Saman, the slayer of Raksases, is the Saman; (verily it serves) for the smiting
highest of metres; verily he makes him the highest of his peers; it contains [5] the word 'sit' (sad); verily
9 God! You have ordained one hundred years as the life of man; please do not cut our life shorter.
Sons of Sudhanvan, after your long journeying, ye came unto the home of liberal Savitar.
22 To me hath Pakasthaman given, a ruddy horse,good at the pole,
3 Yea, when wilt thou, O Indra, thou Most Mighty, make the prayer all-sustaining for the singer?
4 He of the Mighty Stride forth strode, Evayamarut, out of the spacious dwelling-place, their home in
Whose sacrifice the strong seek, Agni, when it shines for never-failing offspring in thine own abode.
5. The worms with white shoulders, the black ones with white arms, and all those that are variegated, these
13 Your rings, O Maruts, rest upon your shoulders, and chains of gold are twined upon your bosoms.
1.9.98 Mantra 98 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Ambarisa Varsagira, Rjisvan Angiras)
11 Agni and Sonia, be ye pleased with these oblations brought to you,
He cherisheth with great delight much wisdom, as all things that be, God among Gods adorable. May
27 Who hath inclined this glorious one, buunteous himself, to give me gifts.
1. May auspicious powers exercise judgement in our favor. May the powers allowing us unobstructed
2. Run forth to battle, conquering the Vritras; thou speedest to quell the foes like one exacting debts.
8 Praised is the gift of him the very wealthy: may we enjoy it, men with hero children:
3 Within the range of their surpassinq power, by might, the Gods created Agni with inventive thought.
With oil upon his face. with high heaven-touching flame, he shineth splendidly, pure, for the Bharatas.
2. The fathers, the divine folk, and all the gods severally follow the Brahmakârin; the Gandharvas did go after him,
5 No limit of thy might hath been appointed, which by its greatness sundered earth and heaven.
From expiration and inspiration are they separated of whom when consecrated one dies, Mitra and
king Varuna (as if, 'the chooser') decree that; he himself did call thee: 'come thou hither'!
30 Thunder out strength and fill us full of vigour: yea, thunder forth and drive away all dangers.
b May Savity of instigations instigate thee, Agni of lords of the house, Soma of lords of the forest, Rudra
1 beg renown of Varuna the Mighty, the God exceeding kind to him who worships.
defeated. If a Brahman and a non-Brahman have a litigation, one should support the Brahman; if one
30. If ye are enveloped in darkness, covered as if by a net--we tear all spells out from here, send them back again
5. King Varuna sees through all that is between heaven and earth, and all that is beyond. He has counted the
Grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a thousand ornaments.
go up to it from behind while it is looking towards the front, to prevent injury to himself.
Let us invoke Brhaspati, the foeless, the clear-voiced God, the Holy One of households
'May it not rain', he should rub with the hand upwards; verily he keeps up the rain. If he practise
l The Hotr hath sat him down in the place of the Hoty, wise,
Agni, well-pleased, well-placed within the chamber gives to a house like this wealth worth the choosing.
All-gods as the morning pressing. They performed the Varunapraghasas, as the midday pressing. They
arise! Let them make it evident to the enemy, when (a man) has been pierced by thee, O Arbudi!
6. On every side, O Soma, flow round us with thy protecting stream,
Yea, they gained even sacrificial titles, and found delight in thine auspicious aspect.
And all acknowledge, when she comes in glory, the manifold and goodly works of Indra.
A flawless skin, containing curds, full to the mouth, containing curds.
in that he casts forward the straw with them, he makes the sacrificers to go by the steeds of the gods to
sixteenfold is force; verily he places force on the north; therefore [1] he that advances to the north is
13 Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, Sage for good fortune in the waters' lap.
15 Because these warring Heroes stay the enmity of every foe,
Thou, mighty one, art celebrated as a Bull, famed as a Bull both near and far.
5 May precious treasures come to us-so will I pray. Come to the votary's gift offered with beauteous
The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid with power and with the help he gives.
7 Praise Agni in the sacrifice, the Sage whose ways are ever true,
So unto thee I sing this invocation. May we find strengthenifig food in full abundance.
of food; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who being meet for kingship obtains not a kingdom should
The stirrings are the secret name of the waters; 'The pure for thee, O pure one, I stir in the gladdening
3. This woman shall be the keeper of thy house, O king (Yama), and her do we make over to thee! May she long
6 Brhaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the weapon of reviling Vala,
Ye are overlords by name; your houses are above; your arrows are the rain; the helper, &c.
Even him whom worthy ones inflame, and living creatures bring to life.
Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the Steer of conquering might, of real vigour.
7 Thou who hast spread abroad the streams by stablished law, and in the field the plants that blossom
means of Agni and Soma Indra slew Vrtra; verily by means of them he lays low his foe. 'By sacrifice to
1. O Agni, holy and divine with splendour and thy pleasant tongue. Bring thou the Gods and worship
The seven Rishis, that did create the beings, shall here churn thee, along with progeny!
15 Give us the splendour, Agni, which may overcome each greedy fiend in our abode,
should be exhausted, he should draw from the Agrayana; verily from the self he develops the sacrifice.
29 So, as a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand have I gained,
Becoming fame, mid Gods, unto the mortal, wealth to the skilled, worth praise mid the Ever-present,
11 I lay upon the Floods your hymn, lightwinning, wherewith Navagvas their ten months completed.
18. May we get past the evil Grâhi (seizure)! Casting aside darkness do thou, (O pestle), let thy lovely voice
9 Give, Pavamana, high renown, give kine and steeds and hero sons:
4 Thee, such, in settlements secure, O Agni, our men serve ever kindled in each dwelling.
2 Men with oblations evermore entreat thee, the swift, to undertake an envoy's duty.
What have thy friends received from thee, the Brahmans who, faithful, rest their hopes on thee, O
(Saman); yonder world is connected with the Brhat; verily he conquers yonder world. 'Forward [2] your
The pan is the concentrated light of these lights; in that he puts down the pan, verily he wins the light
So Agni, much-invoked, bring hither with all speed the Gods, the excellently wise,
When, after offered draughts, Strong Lord, thou laidest him, fain to battle, in the pit in darkness.
8 Offer to him who knows fair rites, who burns with purifying glow,
The rite which Indra-Varuna shall carry this day to high success and glorious issue.
9 With his fair hymns this singer, too, extols you, waking with glad thoughts at the break of morning.
offspring. In that there is a ten-nights' (rite), the sacrificers create offspring. Udanka Çaulbayana has
6. The tawny Bull hath bellowed. fair as mighty Mitra to behold
Usnih is the Gayatri; the four syllables over are fourfooted cattle; just as cake is over cake, so it is with
8 Shine forth at night and morn: through thee with fires are we provided well.
7 Fierce (Asvins), like two powerful (heroes), you enable this moving, perishable mortal (frame) to cross
And may we with our princes, Lord of Tawny Steeds! pass through all peril, led by thee.
14 Rsi, invite the Marut band with offerings, as a maid her friend.
3 Whom do ye visit, whom approach? to whom direct your harnessed car?
6 Do thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself the lord of Jatavedas, mightiest of all,
sides. The gods found a protector in Agni; they offered to Agni, the forward, a cake on eight potsherds,
right. Thou art following; for sky thee! Quicken the sky. Thou art union; for atmosphere thee! Quicken
2 Come thou to our libations, drink of Soma; Soma-drinker thou!
Prajapati; in that he makes the horse advance, by Prajapati he piles the fire. He puts down a lotus leaf;
1.8.89 Mantra 89 – Indra, Vak (Authors: Nrmedha Angiras, Purumedha Angiras)
8 Sit down with us, O Indra, sit beside the juice to drink the meath.
That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, thou mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered
of the waters, as if blown away! Thither do ye, O Apsaras, pass away, (since) ye have been recognised!
Neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come like a youth, O God, a house-possessor.
3 The store of Amrta laid away yonder, O Vata, in thine home,Give us thereof that we may live.
Soma. 'Lead it by the path of Mitra', he says, for atonement. 'Go ye on by the path of holy order, of
8 Like a swift chariot made by men who know their art, he with his red limbs lifts himself aloft to heaven.
And in their cups as they drink-h Those that guard the paths,
Favour and health and strength bestow upon my son; triple protection, Lords of Splendour, grant to
Strengthen for opulence, O Indra Maghavan, our plant desired by many a one!
9 None of us, Maruts, near or at a distance, hath ever reached the limit of your vigour.
2. With seven wheels does this Time ride, seven naves has he, immortality is his axle. He carries hither all these
The omniscience Lord Krishna was aware that the following question will come to Arjun’s mind, “If such are your Vibhutis (opulence), then why most humans forget that you are the Supreme creator and controller of this entire creation?”Shree Krishna says that humans are deluded by the three modes of Maya (His material energy) that are ignorance, passion and goodness. These veil the human consciousness and cause fascination with the bodily pleasures which are short-lived.The word “Maya” is made from mā (not) and yā (what is). Thus, Maya means “that which is not what it appears to be.”Maya, being one of God’s energy, is engaged in the service of hiding His true nature from the souls who are not yet eligible or God-realized. It lures and confuses the souls who are already vimukh (having their backs turned) from God. It also troubles them with problems and difficulties aided by the three-fold material miseries. By this, Maya makes the souls realize that they can never be happy unless they are sanmukh (their face turned) toward God.
28 Sweet are the Soma juices, come! Blent are the Soma juices, come!
1. WITH thee, O Agni, was this singer of the laud: he hath no other kinship, O thou Son of Strength.
3 The dappled kine who stream with milk prepare his draught of Soma juice:
Accepting these our songs, for our wellbeing come to us on your chariot treasure-laden.
11 The Loving Ones besought with many voices the Eagle who had flown away to heaven.
lines is these worlds; verily he excludes its foe from these worlds. When the Angirases went to the world
thunderbolt, (and serves) for success. Curds (is the drink) of the Vaiçya, it is the symbol of the sacrifice
together! I sacrifice with an oblation that causeth to flow together!
5 He filled the earthly atmosphere and pressed against the lights in heaven.
2 give us not as a prey to death, to be destroyed by thee in wrath,
9 Alone renowned as Maghavan in battles, he frighteneth away assembled armies.
g Thy unerring, watchful name, O Soma, to that of thee, O Soma, to Soma, hail!
therefore the head has nine apertures. The sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds. The three sets of
strew the upper strew. The strew is the people; the upper strew is the sacrificer; verily he makes the
2. Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send, purified, milch-kine, abundant yielders!
1. To give eternal glow, we pray Vaisvanara the holy one, Lord of the light of sacrifice.
They seize the flying Steer at the stream's breathing-place: cleansing with gold they grasp the animal herein.
2. With thee do we scatter the Apsaras and Gandharvas. O agasringi (odina pinnata), goad (aga) the Rakshas,
The Bhakti Rasāmṛit Sindhu classifies sādhaks into three classes based on the degree of faith and knowledge: śhāstre yuktau cha nipuṇaḥ sarvathā dṛiḍha-niśhchayaḥ prauḍha-śhraddho ‘dhikārī yaḥ sa bhaktāvuttamo mataḥ yaḥ śhāstrādiṣhvanipuṇaḥ śhraddhāvān sa tu madhyamaḥ yo bhavet komala śhraddhaḥ sa kaniṣhṭho nigadyate (1.2.17-19)[v39] “The highest sādhak (spiritual aspirant) is one who possesses knowledge of the scriptures and is also endowed with firm faith. The medium class sādhak is one who does not have knowledge of the scriptures, but is endowed with faith toward God and Guru. The lowest class sādhak is one, who neither has scriptural knowledge nor is endowed with faith.” For the third category, Shree Krishna says that such persons cannot attain peace either in this life or hereafter. Even worldly activities require the exercise of faith. For example, if a woman goes to a restaurant and places an order for the meal, she has faith that the restaurant will not mix poison in her food. If, however, she is besieged with doubts and wants to subject every food item to a chemical test first, how will she ever enjoy and finish her meal? Similarly, a man goes to barber shop to get a shave, and sits on the chair while the barber moves the sharp edge of his knife over his throat. Now, if the man doubts the barber and suspects his having the intention of murder, he will not be able to sit still for the barber to be able to shave him. Hence, Shree Krishna says in this verse that for the doubting person there is no happiness either in this world or in the next.
seller', he says; verily he places light in the sacrificer, and bestows darkness on the Soma-seller. If he
He hath poured food on men when they have praised him; be this, the dearest reverence, paid to
7 To Atri, cast down to the fire that scorched him, ye gave, O Asvins, strengthening tbod and favour.
4 He shone and caused to shme the worlds that shone not. By Law he lighted up the host of Mornings.
Come to us with your aid as in the days of old, so now for frightened Kanva's sake.
for the prosperity of the Sattra. Verily also whatever is wrongly done in the former days, it serves to
9 So let not Rasa, Krumu, or Anitabha, Kubha, or Sindhu hold you back.
that become for thee a source of life, may that become for thee a source of lustre!
10 All banks of rivers yielded to his manly might; to him they gave, to him, the Strong, gave up their
morning pressing; the Sodaçin is the thunderbolt, the morning pressing is the thunderbolt; verily he
1. Thou, Soma, art preeminent for wisdom; along the straightest path thou art our leader.
Yea, with the glory of the earth, O Agni. Forgive us, for our weal, e'en sin cornmitted.
3. Let Varuna be our chief defence, let Mitra guard us with all aids,
Even as the cows who poured forth every thing for man, Yea, poured forth all thing- for mankind.
7. He goes to Indra, Vayu, and the Asvins with the rapturous joy,
18. We approach first the (god) that has dark horses, is black, sable, destructive, terrible, who casts down the car
4 May Mornings as they spring to life, protect me, and may the Rivers as they swell preserve me.
Young Agni, who with conquering strength subduing the tribes of Nahus made them bring their tribute.
The whole world is amazing, from the tiniest atoms to the largest galaxies, for they are all wonderful creations of God. A little rose flower is also amazing, in its texture, smell, and beauty. The most amazing is the Supreme Lord himself. It is said that Anant Shesh, the divine ten thousand-headed serpent on whom Lord Vishnu resides, has been singing the glories of God since the beginning of creation, and has still not completed them.The soul, being a fragmental part of God, is more amazing than the things of the world because it is transcendental to material existence. Just as God is divine, its fragment, the soul, is also divine. For this reason, mere intellectual prowess is not enough to comprehend the soul, since the existence and nature of the soul are difficult to grasp. The Kaṭhopaniṣhad states:śhravaṇāyāpi bahubhiryo na labhyaḥ śhṛiṇvanto ’pi bahavo yaṁ na vidyuḥāśhcharyo vaktā kuśhalo ’sya labdhā ’ścharyo jñātā kuśhalānuśhiṣhṭaḥ (1.2.7) [v32]“A teacher who is self-realized is very rare. The opportunity to hear instructions about the science of self-realization from such a teacher is even rarer. If, by great good fortune, such an opportunity presents itself, students who can comprehend this topic are the rarest.” Hence, an enlightened teacher is never discouraged when, despite sincere efforts, the majority of the people are either not interested in, or cannot understand the science of the soul.
1. O Child of Strength, to thee whose look is lovely, with oblations we,
1. As at man's service of the Gods, Invoker, thou, Son of Strength, dost sacrifice and worship,
2 King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made restitution of the Brahman's consort.
Now at this sacrifice, with all thy Maruts, on sacred grass, O team-borne God, rejoice thee.
propitiates Varuna. The Raksases, following along by the path, seek to injure the sacrifice; the Prastotr
Shown in bright colour, looking on the assemblies, beyond the churl, to worship of the living.
3 They sing their song like women active in their tasks, along their common path hither from far away,
And, roaring with the holy-thoughted singers, he loosed the bond that held the beams of Morning.
3. O Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, with thy wave pour orb us plentiful accumulated food,
He puts down the rain-winning (bricks); verily he wins the rain. If he were to put (them) down in one
9 O Pavamamas, driving off the godless, looking on the light,
8 Who, with supporting streams and rays that suit him, hath flashed like lightning with his native vigour.
Giving good help, good refuge, goodly guidance, be they our good deliverers, good protectors.
7. Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and west ward, north and south,
4 God, Agni, we will kindle thee, rich in thy splendour, fading not,
22 Yea, let my meditations, let my songs exalt thee evermore.
he says, for being the servants of the gods they go to the gods. 'The priests, the eager ones', he says; the
Pav reverence to King Soma born the Sovran Ruler of the plants. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
declared the ten-night rite to be the prosperity of the Sattra. In that there is a ten-nights' rite, (it serves)
sacrificing becomes worse; he, who knowing the milking of these two sacrifices, milks the sacrifice; he
Then ye brought Surya forward who was lying hidden in the sea.
2. My wish is, he shall long for me, devoted he shall long for me! Ye gods, send forth the yearning love: may
5 Indra with rush and might, sped by his Coursers, hath swiftly won the waters from the southward.
fun, fuller, imperishableness, bad crops, food, freedom from hunger, rice, barley, beans, sesame, kidney
2. Where are your horses, where the reins? How came ye? how had ye the power?
5 Forward to fiercely falling blows pressed Indra, herolike doing many hero exploits.
Far as the Wealthy One hath spread himself abroad, he is the Sire all-visible of this progeny.
5 The great Aditya, to be served with wor. ship, who stirreth men, is gracious to the singer.
penance a third time, he saw this speech of the consecrated, he spoke it. Then indeed did he create
4 Good to mankind, the yearning Purifier hath among men been placed as Priest choice-worthy.
respectfully; they said, 'Let us choose a boon; do thou associate equally with us.' For him [2] they
The best, all-yielding, conquering gift of Bhaga we would gladly win.
1.2.9 Mantra 9 – Agni (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
And giving to the lord of the sacrifice increase of wealth.
1 Arduous prayers have given birth to truth and righteousness. It is as if the blistering heat has given
are drawn to save the self of the sacrificer; verily he wins expiration with the first, inspiration by the
20 For this, ye Lords of ample wealth, bring blessing for our herd, our kine,
6 Wonderful rewards await for those who give pious gifts. The Sun shines in heaven for such persons.
When he, himself, hath yoked his emulous strong horses on heights, he cometh forth, joy-giving, with
the gods. If he fears, 'I shall become diseased in the skin,' he should offer a dark (beast) to Soma and
Whose friend is never done to death, and never, never overcome.
Drops that have been pressed out afar among the folk, and those that have been pressed near us.
makes an offering of the portion of the oblation with the jusana formula; by that means he supports those
5 The mortal who with fuel lights thy flame and offers unto thee,
If a weak man take up a burden, he breaks up into pieces. If there were twelve Upasads in the one-day
Far from the floor of heaven in all directions, the ancient riteless ones fled to destruction.
2 Strong to exalt the early invocation are Night and Dawn who show with varied aspect.
She verily, too, milks poison for the owner that does not present her.
strength upon himself. With (the victim) for Agni he scatters, with that for Sarasvati he makes a pairing,
7 Mother of Kings, may Aditi transport us, by fair paths Aryaman, beyond all hatred.
c Thou hast surpassed in might, O Indra, on the earth
9 Hotar more skilled in sacrifice, bring hither with speed to-day God Tvastar, thou who knowest.
that there are Chandomas, there is the sacrifice. The gods they win by the Prsthas, the cattle by the
4. Far-sighted Soma, Sage and bard, is worshipped in the central point,
With grateful hearts in reverence approach him: to you, O Pratrdas, Vasistha cometh.
Thou, God, art praised with Gods who must be lauded. May we find strengthening food in full
Him I account the ruler of the people who was the first to introduce the Guerdon.
6 Down from the mountains Indra shot hither his well-directed shaft:
1. Praise to the friends who sit in front! to those seated together,praise
On him that iron thunderbolt fell fiercely with its thousand points, lauding his own imperial sway.
13 Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, what heated word the worshippers have spoken,
oblation to Varuna; the realm is connected with Varuna; verily he attains both the people and the realm.
Him Matarisvan and the Gods have fashioned holy for man and first to be entreated.
1.2.3 Mantra 3 – Apris (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
Sole Lord is he of every holy service. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
share; verily he makes him attain prosperity; he prospers. He who desires radiance should offer a cake
of the gods' [3], be says; for that is the force of the gods. 'Guarding from imprecations, impervious to
the fire eats food up to the third generation. The re-piling is like the re-establishment of the fire; he who
thee I take with the pure', he says; the night is of the form of the day, the rays of the sun, he makes the
1. WATER and milk hath he endued, sent forth to thee: the men have drained him with the filters and
front, facing the same way, and two [4] behind, facing the same way; by them they made firm the
thirty nights. Then indeed it was propagated with plants and trees. Those who desire offspring and cattle
8 Accept, O Devas, our oblations and prayers. Grant us that we may be good in three ways:
22 The, tree whereon the fine Birds eat the sweetness, where they all rest and procreate their
2 For this his mighty deed is Visnu lauded, like some wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming;
6 This invocation, these our words may Heaven and Earth, and Indra and the Waters and the Maruts
(earth), the Go the atmosphere, and the Ayus yonder (sky) [1]; verily they mount upon these worlds. The
striding, for Indra slew Vrtra after striding; (verily it serves) for attainment. (The grains) for the yoker of
6 Three thousand, mailed, in quest of fame, together, on the Yavyavati, O much-sought Indra,
look with him; he becomes rich in cattle. He puts (the head) of the horse in the east looking west, that of
he casts it forward; the two uniting overpower the sacrificer; 'Be of one mind with us', he says, to
Thee, therefore, even as Bhaga, will we set anew, young Child of Strength, most wealthy! in our battlesong.
To Agni, of the Gayatri (metre), the Trivrt (Stoma), the Rathantara (Saman), the spring (season),
9 When we are seeking strength we call Agni to help us in the strife,
space-filler is unexhausted, for yonder Aditya is unexhausted [6]. To them the seers said, 'Let us come
the whole of the sacrifice, and does not become a prey to the gods. The cake is on twelve potsherds;
Vala he cleft, and chased away opponents: thus was he tamer of the overweening.
Bring, witb their Dames, the Gods, the Three and-Thirty, after thy Godlike nature, and be joyful.
set of incisors only that of cows, the sheep-like hooves that of sheep, that it is a goat, that is the form of
King Janak attained perfection through karm yog, while discharging his kingly duties. Even after reaching the transcendental platform, he continued to do his worldly duties, purely for the reason that it would set a good example for the world to follow. Many other Saints did the same.Humanity is inspired by the ideals that they see in the lives of great people. Such leaders inspire society by their example and become shining beacons for the masses to follow. Leaders of society thus have a moral responsibility to set lofty examples for inspiring the rest of the population by their words, deeds, and character. When noble leaders are in the forefront, the rest of society naturally gets uplifted in morality, selflessness, and spiritual strength. But in times when there is a vacuum of principled leadership, the rest of society has no standards to pursue and slumps into self-centeredness, moral bankruptcy, and spiritual lassitude. Hence, great personalities should always act in an exemplary manner to set the standard for the world. Even though they themselves may have risen to the transcendental platform, and may not need to perform prescribed Vedic duties, by doing so, they inspire others to perform prescribed Vedic actions.If a great leader of society becomes a karm sanyāsī, and renounces work, it sets an errant precedent for others. The leader may be at the transcendental platform and therefore eligible to renounce work and engage completely in spirituality. However, others in society use their example as an excuse for escapism, to run away from their responsibilities. Such escapists cite the instances of the great karm sanyāsīs, such as Shankaracharya, Madhvacharya, Nimbarkacharya, and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Following their lofty footsteps, these imposters also renounce worldly duties and take sanyās, even though they have not yet attained the purity of mind required for it. In India, we find thousands of such sadhus. They copy the examples of the great sanyāsīs and don the ochre robes, without the concurrent internal enlightenment and bliss. Though externally renounced, their nature forces them to seek happiness, and devoid of the divine bliss of God, they begin indulging in the lowly pleasure of intoxication. Thus, they slip even below the level of people in household life, as stated in the following verse:brahma jñāna jānyo nahīṅ, karm diye chhiṭakāya,tulasī aisī ātmā sahaja naraka mahñ jāya. [v15]Sage Tulsidas says: “One who renounces worldly duties, without the concurrent internal enlightenment with divine knowledge, treads the quick path to hell.”Instead, if a great leader is a karm yogi, at least the followers will continue to do their karm and dutifully perform their responsibilities. This will help them learn to discipline their mind and senses, and slowly rise to the transcendental platform. Hence, to present an example for society to follow, Shree Krishna suggests that Arjun should practice karm yog. He now gives his own example to illustrate the above point.
world of heaven; he puts it down to the east facing west; therefore [6] to the east facing west the animals
heaven; the fire is worthy of heaven; in that he puts down the unifying (bricks), he unifies it; verily he
6 Who in a moment mightily floweth around these two world-halvcs:
1. Auspicious is the aspect of Vadhryasva's fire good is its guidance, pleasant are its visitings.
2 Brhaspati, who made for such a people wide room and verge when Gods were invocated,
Men kindle Agni with their sacrificial gifts, victorious o'er the enemies.
food of the gods; verily they win the chiefest food. They beat the ground with their feet; verily they
7 Ye by your wisdom brought a cow from out a hide; unto that ancient Pair ye gave again their youth.
2 Indra, whatever aids be thine, four be they, or, O Hero, three,
Like as the household herdsman guards the cattle, so move thou round about us in the combat.
of King Soma; him, who knowing thus, places the pressing-stones on the Agnidh's altar, the troop of
The road whereon a man escapes all enemies and gathers wealth.
13. The adversary who lurks and seeks to overcome thee, O Rudra, upon him thou dost fasten thyself from
She will beam forth, the light will hasten hither, and Agni will be present in each dwelling.
9 When we who cat the grass of men are gathered I am with barley-eaters in the corn-land.
not to give of it, by the might of mighty Vaisvânara (Agni) may (that) food be for me auspicious and full of honey!
9 And thou, O Son of Strength, do thou turn hither the Gods to-day to this our holy service.
post is connected with all the gods; verily in setting up the post he delights all the gods. By means of the
Soma, for support. In this same cup (offering) is made for men, gods, and Pitrs; 'Thou givest good
13 Pure, faithful, very strong, with heroes round him, he dwells beside the waters rich with pasture.
3. Bring us, O Indu, hundredfold increase of kine, and noble steeds.
6 As such we seek thee now, O Asura, thee most wise, craving thy bounty as our share.
In conclusion, Shree Krishna emphasizes that we should slay this enemy called lust through knowledge of the self. Since the soul is a part of God, it is divine in nature. Thus, the divine bliss it seeks can only be attained from a divine subject, while the objects of the world are all material. These material objects can never fulfill the innate longing of the soul and so it is futile to create desires for them. We must exert and train the intellect to think in this manner, and then use it to control the mind and the senses.This is explained very beautifully in the Kaṭhopaniṣhad with the help of the model of a chariot:ātmānagvaṁ rathinaṁ viddhi śharīraṁ rathameva tubuddhiṁ tu sārathiṁ viddhi manaḥ pragrahameva chaindriyāṇi hayānāhurviṣhayānsteṣhu gocharānātmendriyamanoyuktaṁ bhoktetyāhurmanīṣhiṇaḥ (1.3.3-4) [v21]The Upaniṣhads say there is a chariot, which has five horses pulling it; the horses have reins in their mouths, which are in the hands of a charioteer; a passenger is sitting at the back of the chariot. Ideally, the passenger should instruct the charioteer, who should then control the reins and guide the horses in the proper direction. However, in this case, the passenger has gone to sleep, and so the horses are holding sway.In this analogy, the chariot is the body, the horses are the five senses, the reins in the mouth of the horses is the mind, the charioteer is the intellect, and the passenger seated behind is the soul residing in the body. The senses (horses) desire pleasurable things. The mind (reins) is not exercising restraint on the senses (horses). The intellect (charioteer) submits to the pull of the reins (mind). So in the materially bound state, the bewildered soul does not direct the intellect in the proper direction. Thus, the senses decide the direction where the chariot will go. The soul experiences the pleasures of the senses vicariously, but these do not satisfy it. Seated on this chariot, the soul (passenger) is moving around in this material world since eternity.However, if the soul wakes up to its higher nature and decides to take a proactive role, it can exercise the intellect in the proper direction. The intellect will then govern the lower self—the mind and the senses—and the chariot will move in the direction of eternal welfare. In this way, the higher self (soul) must be used to control the lower self (senses, mind, and, intellect).
strength; the Treta of throws; the south wind the wind; Sanatana, the Rsi.
Then unto her ye gave King Trasadasyu, the demi-god, the slayer of the foeman.
w From the depth with the top he meted with measures,
[1].' 'Him, who reviles him, he shall fine with a hundred; him, who strikes him, he shall fine with a
The Brahmans with their songs exalting Indra increased his strength that he might slaughter Ahi.
Hini the Most Bounteous Ones, ever united, love; him as ouir Friend the Men who make all swell rain
verily he produces offspring for him. 'O Agni', he says; the impregnator of seed is Agni; 'With the
6 Like a brave archer, like one skilled and bold, a fierce avenger, so he shines in fight.
in yonder world. Prajapati desired to pile the fire; to him spake earth; 'Thou shalt not pile the fire on me;
Twice-born and true, observing sacred duties, Holy and full of light, whose tongue is Agni.
6 What time thy courage and his wheels together, Indra, run their course
men, ye have the brilliance of Agni, ye are the sap of the waters, of the plants.
Bring quickly down, O priests, hither to give us aid, to drink the Soma, Indra Son of Nistigri.
Vayu, dweller in the atmosphere, maker of room; grant room to this thy sacrificer. Reverence to Surya,
To Mitra, him most highly to be lauded, offer in fire oblation that he loveth.
who is consecrated, or should an offering not be made?' The man who is consecrated is the oblation, and
4 First the Angirases won themselves vital power, whose fires were kindled through good deeds and
seers toiled [3]; they practised fervour, these they saw by fervour, and from them they fashioned these
verily thereby they conferred upon him brilliance [1], power, and splendour. For him who is parted from
Hero, Lord of the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with Vrtra, or for waters, or for spoil.
The men together found the Pani's hoarded wealth, the cattle, and the wealth in horses and in kine.
Reverence be to thee when thou art turned away, reverence to thee when thou art turned hither: to thee, entire,
it were will; verily by will he wins will which is splendour. He who practises witchcraft should offer a
When over them the risen Sun is shining. What God shall we adore with our oblation?
25 Maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm soever Sindhu or Asikni hath,
Hither shall come the Vrtra-slayer Indra, Ruler of men, as strongest of the Heroes.
18 Adityas, ye Most Mighty Ones, grant to our children and their seed
12 Deft worker, skiful-handed, helpful, holy, may Tvastar, God, give us these things to aid us,
to offspring', he says; verily he makes him appeased for offspring. He digs with two (verses), for
5 Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven or spring apart to suit the wide earth's measure.
Leader of kine and Queen of all that strengthens, shine, come as first to us, O high-born Morning.
6 Sages well-skilled in work, intelligent, drain out the stalk that roars, the Sage, the Everlasting One.
the strength; the Dvapara of throws; the west wind the wind; Ahabuna the Rsi.
share; verily they produce cattle for him; Soma is the depositor of seed, Pusan the producer of cattle;
5 Thou helpest him the doubly strong whose hymns were sung unceasingly.
To these our princes who have brought rich gifts ne'er to be reft away, highborn! delightful with thy
Who knoweth as the immortal world's Protector, descending, seeing with no aid from other.
5. Victorious, to be hailed with joy, O Soma, flow delighting men,
5 O Agni, those resplendent flames of thine go valorously forth,
In this verse, God declares that He is trikāl-darśhī—knower of the past, present, and the future. Most of us are forgetful of even what we were thinking a few hours ago; whereas, God is omniscient. He remembers and keeps a record of the deeds, words, and even the thoughts of each individual soul of the universe throughout their life and since their infinite lifetimes. God maintains this record of the sañchitkarma or the stockpile of karmas of every soul for endless lifetimes because, as the governor of the law of karma, He dispenses justice to the souls.Shree Krishna says that He has the knowledge of everything, the past, present, and the future. However, with our finite intellect, we cannot know the Almighty God. His infinite glory, splendor, energies, qualities, and extent are beyond the comprehension of our inadequate intellect.The Vedic scriptures state:yaḥ sarvajñaḥ sarvavidyasya jñānamayaṁ tapaḥ (Muṇḍakopaniṣhad 1.1.9) [v25]“God is all-knowing and omniscient. His austerity consists of knowledge.”naiṣhā tarkeṇa matirāpaneyā (Kaṭhopaniṣhad 1.2.9) [v26]“God is beyond the scope of our intellectual logic.”yato vācho nivartante aprāpya manasā saha (Taittirīya Upaniṣhad 2.9.1) [v27]“God cannot be described in words, nor can our mind comprehend Him.”rām atarkya buddhi mana bānī, mata hamāra asa sunahi sayānī (Ramayan) [v28]“God cannot be analyzed by arguments or formulated by words, mind, and intellect.”Only God knows Himself. However, if He finds some eligible soul, He bestows His grace upon that fortunate soul, and then with God’s divine intellect, the soul gets to know God. Therefore, only by God’s grace one can know God. Our material intellect does not have the capacity to know Him otherwise. The concept of God’s grace is discussed again in detail in 10.11 and 18.56.
the atmosphere; the third (he draws), by this he conquers yonder world. In that they are drawn, (they
Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering and most gladdening drink for Indra!
Grant us, O Aditi and ye Adityas, all of one mind, your manifold protection.
3. Grant us, O Agni, through thy grace wealth to support us evermore,
approaches the atmosphere; he offers in the Ahavaniya; verily he makes him go to the world of heaven.
the knob the thundering; by the eyes Surya and Agni; by the two pupils the two lightnings; the lightningstroke by the brain; might by the marrow parts.
s Such like, thus like, do ye come to us, similar and equal.
shall procure for us (all) kinds of cattle, horses, and fowls, good fortune, and glory!
Thence I extend o'er all existing creatures, and touch even yonder heaven with my forehead.
5 Two beakers let us make,- thus said the eldest. Lct us make three,- this was the younger's sentence.
horse) unyoked. He offers after putting it on his head, for from the head it sprung; he offers after
Varuna, destroyer of foes, three ruddy-spotted; three of varied colours are for the All-gods; three
Having stated that God’s senses are everywhere, Shree Krishna now states the exact opposite, that He does not possess any senses. If we try to understand this through mundane logic, we will find this contradictory. We will inquire, “How can God have both infinite senses and also be without senses?” However, mundane logic does not apply to Him who is beyond the reach of the intellect. God possesses infinite contradictory attributes at the same time. The Brahma Vaivarta Purāṇ states:viruddha dharmo rūposā vaiśhvaryāt puruṣhottamāh“The Supreme Lord is the reservoir of innumerable contradictory attributes.” In this verse, Shree Krishna mentions a few of the infinite contradictory attributes that exist in the personality of God.He is devoid of mundane senses like ours, and hence it is correct to say that He does not have senses. Sarvendriya vivarjitam means “He is without material senses.” However, He possesses divine senses that are everywhere, consequently, it is also correct to say that the senses of God are in all places. Sarvendriya guṇābhāsaṁ means “He manifests the functions of the senses and grasps the sense objects.” Including both these attributes, the Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad states:apāṇipādo javano grahītā, paśhyatyachakṣhuḥ sa śhṛiṇotyakarṇaḥ(3.19)“God does not possess material hands, feet, eyes, and ears. Yet He grasps, walks, sees, and hears.”Further, Shree Krishna states that He is the sustainer of creation, and yet detached from it. In His form as Lord Vishnu, God maintains the entire creation. He sits in the hearts of all living beings, notes their karmas, and gives the results. Under Lord Vishnu’s dominion, Brahma manipulates the laws of material science to ensure that the universe functions stably. Also, under Lord Vishnu’s dominion, the celestial gods arrange to provide the air, earth, water, rain, etc. that are necessary for our survival. Hence, God is the Sustainer of all. Yet, He is complete in Himself and is, thus, detached from everyone. The Vedas mention Him as ātmārām, meaning “one who rejoices in the self and has no need of anything external.”The material energy is subservient to God, and it works for His pleasure by serving Him. He is thus the enjoyer of the three guṇas (modes of material nature). At the same time, He is also nirguṇa (beyond the three guṇas), because these guṇas are material, while God is divine.
Whatever the gods did at the sacrifice the Asuras did. The gods saw these Aksnayastomiya (bricks), they
3. Unquelled in fight the hero leads his army with the warrior chiefs,
says; 'for a hundred winters may I kindle thee', he says in effect. He utters the name of his son; verily he
17 May we obtain the Asvins' newest favour, and gain their health-bestowing happy guidance.
me!' The creatures (pragâh) watch over him, Pragâpati watches over him, that knoweth thus.
So that he, firm and sure, hath set his mind on wealth.
Winners of wealth, we call, and wise Brhaspati, destroyer of our foes, and Soma Indra's Friend.
As administrators of various processes of the universe, the devatās provide us with rain, wind, crops, vegetation, minerals, fertile soil, etc. We human beings are indebted to them for all that we receive from them. The devatās perform their duty, and expect us to perform our duty in the proper consciousness too. Since these celestial gods are all servants of the Supreme Lord, they become pleased when someone performs a sacrifice for him, and in turn assist such a soul by creating favorable material conditions. Thus, it is said that when we strongly resolve to serve God, the universe begins to cooperate with us.However, if we begin looking upon the gifts of nature, not as means of serving the Lord but as objects of our own enjoyment, Shree Krishna calls it a thieving mentality. Often people ask the question, “I lead a virtuous life; I do not harm anyone, nor do I steal anything. But I do not believe in worshipping God, nor do I believe in him. Am I doing anything wrong?” This question is answered in the above verse. Such persons may not be doing anything wrong in the eyes of humans, but they are thieves in the eyes of God. Let us say, we walk into someone’s house, and without recognizing the owner, we sit on the sofa, eat from the refrigerator, and use the restroom. We may claim that we are not doing anything wrong, but we will be considered thieves in the eyes of the law, because the house does not belong to us. Similarly, the world that we live in was made by God, and everything in it belongs to him. If we utilize his creation for our pleasure, without acknowledging his dominion over it, from the divine perspective we are certainly committing theft.The famous king in Indian history, Chandragupta, asked Chanakya Pundit, his Guru, “According to the Vedic scriptures, what is the position of the king vis-à-vis his subjects?” Chanakya Pundit replied, “The king is the servant of the subjects and nothing else. His God-given duty is to help the citizens of his kingdom progress in their journey toward God-realization.” Whether one is a king, a businessperson, a farmer, or a worker, each person, as an integral member of God’s world, is expected to do his or her duty as a service to the Supreme.
makes them go to the world of heaven. 'There rejoice on the height of the earth ', he says, for the place of
breath-supporting (bricks); verily he places the breaths in the seed; therefore an animal is born with
So from the rock Brhaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the earth's skin as it were with water.
e O gods that guard the quarters, do ye guard for the gods for sacrifice this horse duly besprinkled.
Be gracious to us, Soma, driving off distress! Thou goest, clothed in butter, to a robe of state.
9 This is the Great Ones' mighty apparition which from of old the radiant Cow hath followed.
17 To every one, O ye Most Wise, who turneth even from sin to you,
3. Shine thou before us, Agni, well-enkindled, with flame, most youthful God, that never fadeth!
Then he accelerates the gift, and by the greatness of his wealth,
as desire [3]. Verily he has recourse to the Adityas as desire with their own share; verily they extend him
1. Soma, the dweller on the hills, effused, hath flowed into the sieve.
that they are fifty less one, redundant in that they are (one) more than forty-eight. Both from the
thee. Let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of our weak enemies!
5 So will I win you strength and life for ever. O Gods, that I may give you room and freedom.
3 Therefore we praise you that your cars may travel far in front of oursYou who accept the eulogy of Ratahavya with his hymns.
1. Soma, as leader of the song, flow onward with thy wondrous aid.
Like a host hurried onward comes thy lasso: fierce, with thy tongue thou piercest, as 'twere barley.
For he bestows great wealth, the Thunder-wielder: worship him, Great and Kind, to win his favour.
Bring the Immortal Gods who strengthen holy Law: so let our sacrifice reach the Gods.
Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives guerdon, not unto the churl.
deity; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who desires food should offer a dark (beast) to Pusan; Pusan is
therefore the stronger does not receive the weaker. He should support (the fire) with twenty-one (pieces
21. Into it Indra shall deposit manliness: do ye, O gods, assemble about it for long life, for life lasting a hundred
20 Gods, we have reached a country void of pasture the land, though spacious, was too small to hold
The glorious food of Varuna and Mitra. To him who spreadeth far this laud I offer.
5 Viraj adhered to Varuna and Mitra: here Tristup day by day was Indra's portion.
7. I think of Agni who is kind, whom, as their home, the milch-kine seek:
the Stotra of the Yajñayajñiya; the sacrifice is as great as is the Agnistoma; a further extension is
With swiftly-racing chariot may we conquer, and rich and blessed be our gains in battle.
14 That Earth, through power of knowing things that may be known, handless and footless yet might
7. Thou art the eye of Kasyapa, and the eye of the four-eyed bitch. Like the sun, moving in the bright day, make
That they in fleet course may bring Indra hither, e'en to this sacrifice arranged completely.
1. The bull with a thousand horns who rose out of the sea, with the aid of him, the mighty one, do we put the folks
With meath and milk Parjanya make us happy. Grant us prosperity, Suna and Sira.
3 And thou, O Agni, thou of Godlike nature, sparest the stones, while caring up the brushwood.
Shine thou away the evil dream, O Dawn, whereof we are afraid. Yours are incomparable aids, and
He hath attained the sky's supremest limits. the Steer hath waxen in the lap of waters.
1. We seek to win thy friendly love, even Pavamana's flowing o'er
Who made for us this All, in fond love laying each varied form within his Daughter's bosom.
e Homage to him of the bed, and to him of the dwelling.
Therefore do ye, O Kings, accomplish what we ask, ye Righteous Ones, whate'er we ask.
18. The spell or the magic which they have buried against thee in the sacrificial straw (barhis), in the field, (or) in
the sacrificers. In that the Prsthas are in succession, they mount upon yonder world with them. If they
Thou art divided thoroughly from Soma. They say thou hast three bonds in heaven
existence do thou enter me', he says; mind is derived from Prajapati, the sacrifice is derived from
Then let your streams flow on in rapid motion. I crave your favour who deserve our worship.
Shree Krishna has used day and night figuratively here. People often confuse the meaning of this verse by taking the words literally. There was once a Khade Shree Baba (the standing ascetic), whose disciples claimed he was a very big sage. He had not slept in thirty-five years. He would stand in his room, resting on a hanging rope under his armpits. He used the rope to help him remain in the standing position. On being asked what his motivation was for this destructive kind of austerity, he would quote this verse of the Bhagavad Gita: “What all beings see as night, the enlightened sage sees as day.” So to practice it, he had given up sleeping at night. What a misunderstanding of the verse! From all that standing, his feet and lower legs were swollen, and so he could practically do nothing except stand.Let us try and understand the true meaning of Shree Krishna’s words. Those who are in mundane consciousness look to material enjoyment as the real purpose of life. They consider the opportunity for worldly pleasures as the success of life, or “day,” and deprivation from sense pleasures as darkness, or “night.” On the other hand, those who have become wise with divine knowledge, see sense enjoyment as harmful for the soul, and hence view it as “night.” They consider refraining from the objects of the senses as elevating to the soul, and hence look on it as “day.” Using those connotations of the words, Shree Krishna states that what is night for the sage is day for the worldly-minded people, and vice versa.
Keep far from us, O Agni, all celestial wrath. and wickedness of godless men!
How is it that thou seekest not the village? Art thou not afraid?
O Hero-souled, the steeds of Vata, yoked by thought, have carried thee to fame while thou art filled with
6. With broom-straw (?), garments, and also with skins they purchased thee: a thing for barter art thou, O plant!
1. THAT we may win us wealth and power we poets, verily, call on thee:
20 The freest God of all who should be worshipped, the guest who is received in all men's houses,
him; he should touch them only, he becomes possessed of cattle, Varuna seizes him not. 'The noose of
We have obtained the power of case and comfort, we haVe become acquainted, with Immortals.
created after the most numerous of the gods. From his feet he meted out the Ekavinça Stoma. After it the
7 The wily Susna, Indra! thou o'er-threwest with thy wondrous powers.
2.1.8.19 Mantra 19: The Propitiation of the Quarters and Offerings to the Satyadatas
n Thou art be whose home is right, whose light is the heaven.
19 O Indra, Mightiest, bring us that which crushes men of evil minds,
then the Atiratra, all the forms of sacrifice, and seizing and holding them, they keep drinking the Soma.
Ye seek mid-air as by a path that leads aright, as by a path that leads direct.
Shall come to bless and succour us at presentation of this laud.
b The head thou art, ruling; thou art the firm, the supporting; thou art the prop, the restrainer; for food
The word siddhi has numerous connotations and meanings. As per the Sanskrit dictionary, a few of them are: attainment of supernatural power, accomplishment, success, performance, fulfillment, solution of a problem, completion of cooking or a task, healing, hitting the mark, maturing, supreme felicity, beatitude, an unusual skill or faculty, perfection.In this verse, Shree Krishna has used siddhi for perfection in the spiritual path. He says, “Only a tiny portion of the innumerable souls are fortunate to get a human birth. Amongst them, only a minuscule strive for spiritual perfection. And even among those perfected souls, ones who are aware of My divine glories and paramount position are very rare.”How is it that even perfected souls are unable to know God? The reason is without bhakti or loving devotion, it is not possible to realize the Supreme. Spiritual aspirants of karm, jñāna, haṭha yog, etc., cannot know God unless they include devotion in their practice. Shree Krishna has stated this fact several times in the Bhagavad Gita:“The Supreme Divine Personality is greater than all that exists. Although He is all-pervading and all living beings are situated in Him, yet He can be known only through devotion.” BG 8.22.“O Arjun, by unalloyed devotion alone can I be known as I am, standing before you. Thereby, on receiving my divine vision, O scorcher of foes, one can enter into union with me.” BG 11.54“Only by loving devotion to me does one come to know who I am in truth. Then, having come to know me, my devotee enters into full consciousness of me.” BG 18.55Therefore, such spiritual aspirants who do not include devotion in their sadhana attain only limited theoretical knowledge or jñāna. And devoid of vijñāna the experiential knowledge, they are unable to know God or the Absolute Truth.Shree Krishna has stated in this verse that only one among numerous humans knows Him in Truth. In the next verse, He moves on to describe the material and spiritual dimensions of His energies.
10 He nursed the Infant of the Sire and Maker: alone the Babe sucked many a teeming bosom.
May for me prosperity, comfort, desire, wish, longing, kindliness, good, better, superior, fame, good
The gladdening draughts and wisdom have approached you: send ye us riches with good store of
May she, as rich in milk, be drained for us through each succeeding year.
middle (of man's body). It is threefold. The breath is threefold; verily he places the threefold breath in
17 Therewith enraptured, Hero, slay our foemen, the unfriendly, Maghavan be they kin or strangers,
Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. Save me before it be too late, from this my curse.
c Let the god Savitr impel you to the most excellent offering.
8. The waves of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra, Varuna,
14 Who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth glory in his wars,
6 With holy prayer I yoke thy long-maned pair of Bays: come hitherward; thou holdest them in both thy
Both thy two regions of the earth, O Visnu, we know: thou God, knowest the highest also.
thee. By means of that do thou, full of force, live (a hundred) autumns; may it not flow out of thee: physicians have
Like lightnings flashing round us, like a rattling car that seeks the spoil.
him. From a frying-pan he should (take fire) and deposit (it) for one who desires food; in a frying-pan
50 By means of sacrifice the Gods accomplished their sacrifice: these were the earliest ordinances.
hurls it at his foe, so as not to make a failure. He utters the Vasat call in anger, to lay low his foe. The
1. FAIN would I win my friend to kindly friendship. So may the Sage, come through the air's wide
1. Reverence to Prâna, to whom all this (universe) is subject, who has become the lord of the all, on whom the all
Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which Gods unsoiled by dust had bound.
16 One of the ten, the tawny, shared in common, they send to execute their final purpose.
I deck my songs as one deft-handed, wise in mind prepares the water that hath power in solemn rites.
Quickly be gracious unto us like waters, like sacrifice victorious, thousand-fashioned.
18 From where oblations must be laid, which is the Well-beloved's home,
2 By means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to hand,
Vasus and Rudras shall come near to give us aid, and Maruts listen to our call.
protect me from the (evil) eye; O strong one, O impetuous one, O instigator, O thou of all men, with
Rathantara (Saman) has the Pañcadaça (Stoma); verily they win power. The Brhat has the Saptadaça [2],
Bend your way hither, ye who travel widely: hear this our envoy who hath gone to meet you.
duties; When I am performing my priestly functions; When I am deep in thought; When I am in the process of
As soon as thou wast born thou wast an envoy, thou, Mighty One, was Leader of the people.
To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we seek, foremost in sacrificial rites.
When night hath passed, O ye who send us plenteous food.
8. As one victorious unsubdued in battle, pour forth wealth to us:
The Friend of Indra mounts his car well-knowing, he comes thereon to meet the prayer we offer.
One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath beheld him? Whom then shall we honour?
1. GREAT art thou, Agni, sacrifice's Herald: not without thee are deathless Gods made joyful.
Atiratra. They won yonder world, and gave (the thousand). Now the atmosphere [3] was broken.
8 May the two Priests Divine, the sage, the sweet-voiced lovers of the hymn,
If ye approve not even this, Sudhanvan's Sons, then at the third libation gladden ye yourselves.
3 Great are his ways of guiding us, and!nanilbld are Ins eulogies:
3. I call on thee, Sabardugha, this day, inspirer of the psalm.
continuously [4], for the continuance of these worlds. He should not break the decades lest he should
atmosphere; thine is this all that has a spirit and has breath upon the earth.
1. MAY we, the pious, win much food by prayer, may Agni with fair light pervade each act,He the observer of the heavenly laws of Gods, and of the race of mortal man.
Turn from here upon those that have fabricated thee, O spell, awaken them to childlessness!
Over all worlds let Agni be the Sovran, the messenger of Gods with rapid coursers.
So may the Brace, well-skilled in all its duties, guard manfully the man from every quarter.
10. They have prepared and fashioned for this hero words never matched, most plentiful, most
Visnu hath power supreme and might iliat finds the day, and with his Friend unbars the stable of the
Wherein our sires of old who knew the footsteps found light and sought the kine within the mountain.
him reposing. 'Thee the sage, Dadhyañc', he says; Dadhyañc, son of Atharvan, was full of brilliance;
drink of the Rajanya; gruel is as it were harsh; the Rajanya is as it were harsh [2], it is the symbol of the
3. A supporter art thou, O house, with broad roof, containing purified grain! To thee may the calf come, to thee the
18 When to his house ye came, to Divodasa, hasting to Bharadvaja, O ye Asvins,
is omitted, but he who offers the sacrifice does so with the wish, 'May it be in my support.' If they omit
12 Make our wealth perfect thou, O Agni, Lord divine: for thou hast kinship with the Gods.
the fire is threefold; verily be makes the whole extent of the fire attain support. 'Enkindled, O Agni,
15 The Maruts sang thy praise in this encounter, and in thee all the Deities delighted,
The Lord, the Mighty One, of manly vigour, victorious, Hero, true, and full of wisdom.
19 Bestow on us resplendent wealth. O Indra let us enjoy thine overflow of bounty.
Varuna, therefore in front he sees with the eye; moving all round, that for the Açvins; therefore on all
Enter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a roar approach the ray of Sarya.
10. O hero Agni, Lord of men, on hearing this new laud of mine
May we, O fair of check, win booty with thine aid, O Thunderer, swiftly seeking it.
6 Help us to strength, blest Agni! rich in progeny, abundant, in our sacrifice.
Transport us over trouble to well-being repel thou from us all assaults of mis. chief.
2 Agni, to thee I lift the oil-fed ladle, bright, with an offering, bearing our oblation.
“Inner light” is the divine knowledge that is bestowed from within in the form of realization, by the grace of God, when we surrender to Him. The Yog Darśhan states:ṛitambharā tatra prajñā (1.48)In the state of samadhi, one's intellect becomes filled with realization of the Truth.After instructing Arjun about the need to withstand the impulses of desire and anger, Shree Krishna reveals the confidential means of practicing this. The words yo’ntah sukho mean “one who is internally happy.” There is one kind of happiness that we get from external objects, and another kind of happiness that we experience from within when we absorb the mind in God. If we do not experience happiness within, we will not be able to permanently resist external temptations. But when the bliss of God starts flowing within the heart, then the fleeting external pleasures seem trivial in comparison and are easy to renounce.Saint Yamunacharya states:yadāvadhi mama chetaḥ kṛiṣhṇa-padāravindenava-nava-rasa-dhāmanudyata rantum āsīttadāvadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamānebhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣhṭu niṣhṭhīvanaṁ cha“Ever since I have begun meditating upon the lotus-like feet of Lord Krishna, I have been experiencing ever-increasing bliss. If by chance the thought of sex pleasure comes to my mind, I spit at the thought and curl my lips in distaste.”
g O lord of the world, thou who hast houses above and here, do thou give us increase of wealth,
the hymn, he becoming prosperous finds support in food; verily he prospers. He who is seized by
Up stands the grateful-minded priest, elected, appointed to invoke the two Nasatyas.
From earth ye brought the sage to life in wondrous mode; be your great deeds done here for him who
g Protect my expiration; protect my inspiration; protect my cross breathing; make my eye to shine
She stayed not for a herald to conduct her: thus is the kingdom of a ruler guarded.
is an oblation; verily for him from his own place of birth he produces cattle. He who desires cattle
5 This Soma I address that is most near us, that which hath been imbibed within the spirit,
2. Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well, G God, art thou,
As on a linch-pin, firm, rest things immortal: he who hath known it let him here declare it.
Wide as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of heaven!
Shree Krishna had previously said that people who are attached to worldly enjoyment get attracted to the flowery words of the Vedas, which propagate ostentatious rituals for gaining worldly opulences and attaining the celestial abodes (verses 2.42–2.43). However, one whose intellect is illumined with spiritual knowledge no longer seeks material sense pleasures, knowing them to be harbingers of misery. Such a person then loses interest in Vedic rituals. The Muṇḍakopaniṣhad states:parīkṣhya lokānkarmachitānbrāhmaṇo nirvedamāyānnāstyakṛitaḥ kṛitena (1.2.12)[v45]“Realized sages go beyond Vedic rituals, after understanding that the pleasures one attains from fruitive karmas, in this life and in the celestial abodes, are temporary and mixed with misery.”
The foemen, measuring exceeding closely, abandoned to Sudas all their provisions.
1. Indra, as one with mighty arm, gather for us with thy right hand,
6. The plants whose father was the sky, whose mother the earth, Whose root the (heavenly) ocean--may those
Hither, for men to grasp, are brought the press-stones, far-thundering, famous, strong, that wait on
Quickly with Kutsa's friend destroy the Dasyus, and roll the chariot-wheel of Sarya near us.
a Let Brhaspati place thee on the ridge of earth, full of light, for every expiration, inspiration; support all
11. As for a chariot-race, the skilful speaker, first hymn, inventor, hath with song been started.
1. WONDERFUL let your coming be, wondrous with help, ye Bounteous Ones,
pan) deficient in size [1]; if he desire of a man, 'May he eat food that fails not', he should put it down
4 Pressed by the stones, with hymns, and graciously inclined, illuminating both the Parents, Heaven
4. Live thou, thriving a hundred autumns, a hundred winters, and a hundred springs! May Indra, Agni, Savitar,
2. Reverence, O Prâna, to thy roaring (wind), reverence, O Prâna, to thy thunder, reverence, O Prâna, to thy
6 Among mankind many are thy libations, and many a time the pious sageinvokes thee.
Aryaman, Bhaga, all whose thoughts are faithful: hither I call the Bright who share in common.
No brother, kin, or friend to him who pours not, destroyer of the dumb who would resist him.
Led by the men he makes the milk his raiment; then shall he, of himself, engender worship.
5. Breath of the mighty Dames, the Child, speeding the plan of' sacrifice,
4.3.18 Sukta 18 – Charm of a woman against a rival or co-Wife
2. Slay the worms in this boy, O Indra, lord of treasures! Slain are all the evil powers by my fierce imprecation!
everything whatsoever that I have received as a gift--may Agni, the priest, render that an auspicious offering!
3. I invoke with reverence Agni, who has his own riches; here attached he shall beap up gain for us! I procure
God (Brahma), prayer and charity uphold the Earth. May this Earth, the product of our past, present and future,
2 Loud belloweth the Bull whose horns are sharpened: upon the height above earth's breadth he
1. AGNI I hold as herald, the munificent, the gracious, Son of Strength, who knoweth all that live, as
6 Good work for us, the glorious Night and Morning, like female weavers, waxen from aforetime,
Winner of wealth, the effectual juice is flowing on, Singer and Sage by wisdom, dear as heaven itself.
2. His two red horses, all-supporting, let him yoke: let him, well-worshipped, urge them fast!
a Thy back is the sky; thy place earth; thy breath the atmosphere; thy birthplace the ocean.
Chapter 1, Decade 1-24 (83 Hymns: 3,3,10,10,4, 3,3,3,3,3, 3,2,3,3,3, 3,3,2,3,3, 3,3,3,1)
Be the team's Lord a well to thee the singer: cleansed is the sweet plant's stalk for deed of glory.
To Indra, the king, a boar; to Varuna, the king, a black (antelope); to Yama, the king, a deer; to the bull,
12. Do ye, (O grains), remain in the (winnowing-) basket, while (the wind) blows over you; be separated, ye who
26. O king Soma, infuse harmony into the good Brâhmanas who shall sit about thee! Eagerly do I invite to the
May their Sire Rudra, young and deft, and Prsni pouring much milk, bring fair days to the Maruts.
5 Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma whereof thou, Indra, ever drinking,
the Moon. You are farther than the waters have swept and hotter than fire. O Love, You are greater than all.
4 When, clothed in manly strength, the Sage flows in celestial wisdom round,
5 For here in divers ways these men invoking thee, holder of treasures, sing hymns to win thine aid.
1. LET Brahmans and Angirases come forward, and let the roar of cloudy heaven surround us.
words he puts down) on the south; the Yavas' are the months, the Ayavas are the half-months; therefore
n Either the sacrifice [2] milks the lord of the sacrifice, or the lord of the sacrifice milks the sacrifice.
3 The man, her pledge, must by her hand be taken when they have cried, She is a Brahman's consort.
Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load of wood. Supreme is Indra over all.
With lofty ridges earth is far extended, and Agni's flame hath lit the spacious surface.
11 We sought the wisdom of the wise. Sakra, Kine-giver, Thunder-armed!
3. Thy juice, O Pavamana, sends its rays abroad fixe splendid skill,
2. Vihalha is thy father's name, Madâvatî thy mother's name. Thou art verily not such, as to have consumed thy
Shree Krishna explained in the last fewverses that all living beings dwell in Him. This statement may bring up the following question: “When mahāpralaya (the great annihilation) takes place and the entire world is wound up, then where do all the living beings go?” The answer to this question is being given in this verse.In the previous chapter, verses 8.17to 8.19, Shree Krishna explained how creation, maintenance, and annihilation follow a repetitive cycle. Here, the word kalpa-kṣhaya means “the end of Brahma’s lifespan.” On the completion of Brahma’s life of 100 years, which is equal to 311 trillion 40 billion earth years, the entire cosmic manifestation dissolves and goes into an unmanifest state. The pañch mahābhūta merge into the pañch tanmātrās; the pañch tanmātrās merge into ahankār; ahankār merges into mahān; mahān merges into prakṛiti, the primordial form of the material energy; and prakṛiti goes and rests in the divine body of the Supreme Lord, Maha Vishnu.At that time, all the souls within the material creation also go and rest in the body of God, in a state of suspended animation. Their gross and subtle bodies merge back into the source, Maya. However, the causal body still remains. (The three kinds of bodies have been described in detail in the commentary to verse 2.28) After dissolution, when God creates the world again, the material energy unwinds in the reverse sequence prakṛiti—mahān—ahankār—pañch tanmātrā—pañch mahābhūta. Then, the souls that were lying in a state of suspended animation with only causal bodies are again placed in the world. In accordance with their causal bodies, they again receive subtle and gross bodies, and the various life forms are created in the universe. These life forms vary in nature amongst the different planes of existence. In some planetary systems, fire is the dominant element in the body, just as in the earth plane, the dominant bodily elements are earth and water. Hence, the bodies vary in their subtleness and the functions they can perform. Shree Krishna thus calls them myriad life forms.
If thou, O Agni, God, accept it gladly, may we obtain thereby the heavenly Waters.
Who furthers, man-like, eighth in place, as Cleanser, all the work divine.
14 Rich, they are come with wealth for living beings, O friends, Adhvaryus, seat them in their places.
16 Give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts; slay ye the Raksasas and drive away disease.
As a yogi perfects the practice of withdrawing the mind from sense objects and securing it upon God, the passions get subdued and the mind becomes utterly serene. Earlier, effort was required to focus it upon God, but now it naturally runs to him. At this stage, the elevated meditator sees everything in its connection with God. Sage Narad states:tat prāpya tad evāvalokayati, tad eva śhṛiṇoti,tad eva bhāṣhayati, tad eva chintayati(Nārad Bhakti Darśhan, Sūtra 55)[v20]“The consciousness of the devotee whose mind is united in love with God is always absorbed in him. Such a devotee always sees him, hears him, speaks of him, and thinks of him.” When the mind gets absorbed in God in this manner, the soul begins to experience a glimpse of the infinite bliss of God who is seated within.Sādhaks often ask how they can know that they are progressing. The answer is embedded in this verse. When we find our inner transcendental bliss increasing, we can consider it as a symptom that our mind is coming under control and the consciousness is getting spiritually elevated. Here, Shree Krishna says that when we are śhānta-rajasaṁ (free from passion) and akalmaṣham (sinless), then we will become brahma-bhūtam (endowed with God-realization). At that stage, we will experience sukham uttamam (the highest bliss).
5 Asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, regard the many prayers which Rsis offer.
16 These two united paths bear him who journeys born from the head and pondered with the spirit
h May we win by thy help, O Agni, our wish,
5 Indra can never be brought low, Sakra can never be subdued:
Which, Caster of the Stone! gives room and shines like gold,
As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty and might all other waters.
5 For all these holy singers here implore these Twain to succour them,
were defeated; he, who knowing the milking of the sacrifice [1] sacrifices, milks another sacrificer. 'May
4 May nine-and-ninety harnessed steeds who yoke them at thy will bring thee.
1. The internal disease that has set in, that crumbles the bones, and crumbles the joints, every balâsa do thou
great name of the manly Asura; endowed with every form (quality) he entered upon immortal (deeds).
5 The twofold opulence, O Wonder-Worker, of thee new-born each day never decreases.
2 Surya hath spread his light as splendour: hither came the Cows' Mother, conscious, from the stable,
Thou, Indra, art alone the Lord of cattle; may we enjoy the treasure which thou givest.
5. The atmosphere was the net, the great regions (of space) the (supporting) poles of the net: with these Sakra
Come, fully girt about with wealth for us and for our kith and kin!
1. AGNI, be kind to us when we approach thee good as a friend to friend, as sire and mother.
14 While here he dwelleth in sublimest station, resplendent with the rays that never perish,
10 That brilliant gathering of your cars, the company of Maruts, of the Youthful Ones,
8 Whose coloured sap they drive with stones, the yellow meath-distilling juice,
They made the Night and Dawn of different colours, and set the black and purple hues together.
4.6.138Sukta 138 – Charm for depriving a Man of his Virility
throws it silently a fourth time; verily he excludes him from the unmeasured. He uproots it; verily what
3 Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, yea, cast them into darkness that hath no support,
who is seized by evil, he should offer this (offering of) clotted milk to Indra and Varuna; verily Indra
O Maruts, of our Soma juice effused to-day drink all of you with eager haste.
8. In ceaseless flow hath he poured forth his praises, as waters from the ocean's depth, to Indra,
1. The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of Soma juice,
2 He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his hands, fain to win light, car-borne, in forays for the kine.
Pururavas, return thou to thy dwelling: I, like the wind, am difficult to capture.
In heart accordant and in wish one-minded are the Adhvaryus and the heavenly Waters.
3 Boldly, Bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the Kanvas' sake.
(sky); verily with them do they proceed; verily also in them they find support. These indeed are the
Wherewith ye, Heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even the poor man's worship where the priest attends.
c This behind, all extending; the leaders of his host and bands are Ratheprota and Asamaratha, and
4 None may impede that power of Savitar the God whereby he will maintain the universal world.
The Puronuvakya is marked in front; verily he places light in this world; the Yajya is marked behind;
1. THE Maruts of resistless might who love the rain, resplendent, terrible like wild beasts in their
We know the good we gain from him the Mighty One when we attract him as a herdsman calls the kine.
verily he makes the oblation, and then he proceeds in order. The fore-sacrifices are the father, the aftersacrifices the son; in that having offered the fore-sacrifices he sprinkles the oblations, the father makes
The mother was above, the son was under and like a cow beside her calf lay Danu.
1. THREE spheres of light, O Varuna, three heavens, three firmaments ye comprehend, O Mitra:
Lightly like winged falcons, O ye Heroes, come, come to enjoy our ofrerings.
Strong in thy deeds, quelling attack, Indra, Lord, mightiest! of the brave.
What sloth is this? Why dost thou not rejoice thee? Why dost thou not delight thyself with giving?
6 When, Indra, thou dost yoke thy Steeds, there is no better charioteer:
2. He who gains Indra's grace by fire enkindled, finds as easy way
2. The Steer shines brightly with the Gods, dear Sage in his appointed home.
Thou, mightiest, Thunder-armed, hast driven by force the Dragon from the earth, lauding thine own supremacy.
3. Red-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its lovely breast,
He made the Three Times Seven pour out the milky flow: Soma, the Cheerer, yields whate'er the heart
3. So he resplendent in the battle overcame Krivi by might. He with his majesty bath filled the earth and
uniting metro; the separating metre; the Brhat metro; the Rathantara metre; the collecting metre; the
is placed in this (brick), to it I resort, and may it be my protection and my refuge.
2. Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, and both the worlds, yea, and the sun.
4 Accept this offering, Agni, whom aforetime Vadhryasva, hath entreated and enkindled.
6 Eager to laudyou, we with songs invoke you, bearing sacred food,
4 This day invited may the Sons of Rudra, resistless, excellent, stoop down to meet us;
interpose the broad atmosphere', he says; verily with these worlds the sacrificer obstructs his foes. The
2. Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and look to thee
6 Give us our sight again, O Asuniti, give us again our breath and our enjoyment.
37 O Pusan, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the sharer of my pleasures;
verily from him he smites away the evil one. 'We have come to the highest light', he says; the highest
wins rain. With the Samyanis the gods went (sám ayus) to these worlds; that is why the Samyanis have
wins the dawns of the goddesses. He offers to Tanunapat; verily he wins the sacrifice [1]. He offers to
2 Invincible through Fervour, those whom Fervour hath advanced to heaven,
should sacrifice with the same (offering) he goes to the end of cattle [3] who sacrifices with a thousand;
13 To him, the mighty stream of wealth, the Soma-presser's rescuing Friend,
'Swear on oath that thou wilt equally associate (with them): then will I return them to you.' He took the
5. Heart-knower, Sovran of the heart, thou art effused, O Soma, Tthat,
Thrice, O ye Asvins, bring us what shall make us glad; thrice send us store of food as nevermore to fail.
Favour us noble actions of the pious, impetuous vita blow on us with favour.
Puronuvakya, is marked in front; therefore the ox feeds with the first half. The Yajya is marked behind;
Far let him flee away who speaketh wickedness and vanish like a mote of dust.
2. By (the plant) with which the Âsurî allured Indra away from the gods, by that do I subject thee, that I may be
3 These Sons of yours well skilled in work, of wondrous power, brought forth to life the two great
The sons of Kanva, striving heavenward, call on you with draughts of Soma juice out-poured.
I decorate with songs the mighty actions which Agni, Fort-destroyer, did aforetime.
Rushing in rapture; and -o'er Satakratu came the gladdening shout that urged him on to victory.
l The path that leadeth to the gods, along it may the sacrifice go to the gods.
Toward the end of the previous chapter, Shree Krishna had mentioned a few words like Brahman, adhibhuta, adhiyatma, adhidaiva,andadhiyajna. Also, that the enlightened souls are in full consciousness of Him even at the time of their death. Hearing this, Arjun is curious and wants to know more. In these two verses, he puts forth to Shree Krishna seven questions, out of which six are about these words, and the seventh question is regarding remembering God at the time of death. Since Shree Krishna had Himself introduced these subjects, Arjun wants Him to elaborate upon them.
There art thou, there; and here with noble heroes may we o'ercome all hosts that fight against us.
Known as the Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, who wields the bolt, He, O ye men, is Indra.
with that deity, sit ye firm in the manner of Angiras.
36 Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while thou art purified flow for our welfare.
himself the glory of the sacrifice. If he desire, 'May I bestow upon the sacrificer the glory of the
abscess, and the pain in the heart. That unknown disease do we drive away downward.
3 So further honour as our guests the Hero Gods and then the Dames.
The metres set their wishes on one another's world, and the gods then interchanged them. The fourth day
the world of heaven; (verily it serves) to reveal the world of heaven [5]. He places thirteen world-fillers;
19 Cast down thine eyes and look not up. More closely set thy feet. Let none
Attracted by the lure of an ascetic life, people often renounce their work, only to discover later that their renunciation is not accompanied by an equal amount of mental and intellectual withdrawal from the sensual fields. This creates a situation of hypocrisy where one displays an external show of religiosity while internally living a life of ignoble sentiments and base motives. Hence, it is better to face the struggles of the world as a karm yogi, than to lead the life of a false ascetic. Running away from the problems of life by prematurely taking sanyās is not the way forward in the journey of the evolution of the soul. Saint Kabir stated sarcastically:mana na raṅgāye ho, raṅgāye yogī kapaṛājatavā baḍhāe yogī dhuniyā ramaule, dahiyā baḍhāe yogī bani gayele bakarā[v2]“O Ascetic Yogi, you have donned the ochre robes, but you have ignored dyeing your mind with the color of renunciation. You have grown long locks of hair and smeared ash on your body (as a sign of detachment). But without the internal devotion, the external beard you have sprouted only makes you resemble a goat.” Shree Krishna states in this verse that people who externally renounce the objects of the senses while continuing to dwell upon them in the mind are hypocrites, and they delude themselves.The Puranas relate the story of two brothers, Tavrit and Suvrit, to illustrate this point. The brothers were walking from their house to hear the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam discourse at the temple. On the way, it began raining heavily, so they ran into the nearest building for shelter. To their dismay, they found themselves in a brothel, where women of disrepute were dancing to entertain their guests. Tavrit, the elder brother, was appalled and walked out into the rain, to continue to the temple. The younger brother, Suvrit, felt no harm in sitting there for a while to escape getting wet in the rain.Tavrit reached the temple and sat for the discourse, but in his mind he became remorseful, “O how boring this is! I made a dreadful mistake; I should have remained at the brothel. My brother must be enjoying himself greatly in revelry there.” Suvrit, on the other hand, started thinking, “Why did I remain in this house of sin? My brother is so holy; he is bathing his intellect in the knowledge of the Bhāgavatam. I too should have braved the rain and reached there. After all, I am not made of salt that I would have melted in a little bit of rain.”When the rain stopped, both started out in the direction of the other. The moment they met, lightning struck them and they both died on the spot. The Yamdoots (servants of the god of Death) came to take Tavrit to hell. Tavrit complained, “I think you have made a mistake. I am Tavrit. It was my brother who was sitting at the brothel a little while ago. You should be taking him to hell.” The Yamdoots replied, “We have made no mistake. He was sitting there to avoid the rain, but in his mind he was longing to be at the Bhāgavatam discourse. On the other hand, while you were sitting and hearing the discourse, your mind was yearning to be at the brothel.” Tavrit was doing exactly what Shree Krishna declares in this verse; he had externally renounced the objects of the senses, but was dwelling upon them in the mind. This was the improper kind of renunciation. The next verse states the proper kind of renunciation.
Wherewith the iron one, fierce e'en against the strong, in rapture, fettered wily Sushna fast in bonds.
with the horse sacrifice makes Prajapati whole; verily he becomes whole; this is the atonement for
5 Rbhuksans! him, for handy wealth, the mightiest comrade in the fight,
Instruct me how to deal to each his portion, and by what ' path to bring you man's oblation.
hundred years and has a hundred powers; verily he rests on life and power. This is a pipe with
With homage and oblations will we serve you, O Mitra-Varuna, when the Sun hath risen.
When wilt thou clothe this poet's laud with plenty, and when wilt thou enrich our hymns with booty?
1.2.41 Mantra 41 – Various Deities (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada
1. O Agni thou who art the Lord of wealth in kine, thou Son of Strength,
He with bright rays shines forth in splendid beauty, unfed with wood. in waters, oil-enveloped.
On every side about the earth and heaven go forth the spacious paths without a limit.
3. For Indra Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press the Soma juice;
Even him who, dear as heaven's own light, gives to our princes high renown.
Indra, and Agni, and the Asvins, lauded. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
7 What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, from which they fashioned forth the Earth and
9. The prickly porcupine, tripping down from the mountain, did declare this: 'Whatsoever serpents, living in
8 Now let this close admixture be close intermigled with these Cows,
2. Without fastening the), (the protecting plants?) held fast, thus it has been arranged by Manu. The vishkandha
24 Asvins, ye raised, like Soma in a ladle Rebha, who for ten days and ten nights, fettered.
verily they produce cattle for him. Soma is the impregnator of seed, Pusan the producer of cattle; verily
back of his peers; he becomes possessed of a village. It is with a white back, for it has Brhaspati as its
1. From heaven hath Pavamana, made, as 'twere, the marvellous thunder, and
prosperity, with a covering most healing; with that deity do thou sit firm in the manner of Angiras.
1. ONE half of day is dark, and bright the other: both atmospheres move on by sage devices.
charm) that was, will be, and is now present, with this do I ward off thy poison.
3. Pour out for Indra, Thunder-armed, the milk of heaven, the Soma's juice,
was the overlord. They praised with nineteen, the Çudra and the Arya were created, day and night were
The Wise, the Conqueror whom none may overcome, armed with sharp-pointed weapons: may he hear
1. To him who shines afar, Vaisvanara, shall bards give precious things that he may go on certain
overpowered the Asuras with the Abhyatanas, conquered them with the Jayas, and won the kingdom
1. The (plant) that Gamadagni dug up to promote the growth of his daughter's hair, Vâtahavya has brought here
be utters speech, 'Prepare the fast food.' The consecrated is bound by a vow of sacrifice; verily with
greatness in this form. 'Yoke ye the ass', (with these words) (he halters) the ass; verily he establishes the
6 To me, weak, innocent, thou, luminous Agni, bast boldly given as 'twere a heavy burthen,
13 The strong Bay Horses of the Sun thou stayedst: this Etasa drew not the wheel, O Indra.
6 When sitting pondering in deep devotion in Ausija's abode they ply the press-stone,
The fire is Rudra; he is born then when he is completely piled up; just as a calf on birth desires the teat,
Yield us not, Holy One, to fiend or hunger; injure us not at home or in the forest.
9. Agni, drive thou the wicked foe, the evil-hearted thief away,
21 The man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial gifts
2 Agni, the Holy One, the everlasting, who shines far beaming with celestial splendours;
16 Defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all sides, Indra, shield us well.
the Jagati; in that the Agrayana is drawn on the fourth day, he draws it in its own abode; verily also they
1. DRINK, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee with our milky draught.
1. How may the mind draw nigh to please thee, Agni? What hymn of praise shall bring us greatest
4 When, mighty Rudras, through the nights and through the days, when through the sky and realms of
5 The Seven carry seven spears; seven are the splendours they possess,
6 Eager for riches, men have formed for thee this song, like as a skilful craftsman fashioneth a car, so
May we who have sung hymns to thee have thee for envoy in each house. Bring food to those who sing
7 Indra, thy Bay Steeds showing forth their vigour have sent a loud cry out that droppeth fatness.
The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers with wealth thousandfold.
10 Yadu and Turva, too, have given two Dasas, well-disposed, to serve,
injures; 'Harm not our offspring with thy body', he says; verily for his offspring he makes him gentle.
3. He, while they purify him, stands high over all things that exist Soma, a God as Surya is.
When your song, Maruts, rose, and, with oblation, the Soma-pourer sang his hymn in worship.
for Indra is the treasure of the gods, and that is why the new moon night has its name (ama-vasya),
All these personalities receive their positions by the power of God and they discharge their respective duties in reverence to the Laws of Creation. Thus, they are all mentioned as beholding the cosmic form of God with wonder.
37 As Sovran Lord thereof thou Passest through these worlds, O Indu, harnessing thy tawny wellwinged Mares.
offspring when propagated find support in these worlds, he with his body mounts the atmosphere, with
make 'Godspeed'. 'May we share thy limbs', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. Of this (victim)
46. The viliptî, O Brihaspati, her that has, begotten a sterile cow, and the sterile cow (herself), the non-Brâhmana,
beginning of the sacrifice is being performed, the Raksases seek to destroy the sacrifice; the golden disk
7. Death from thirst, and death from hunger, moreover, ill-luck at dice, all that, O apâmârga, do we wipe out with
Men blind and sightless through his splendour hurt not: his never-failing lovers have preserved him.
12 With hymns and coursers we will gain, Indra, through thee, both steeds and spoil
9. Best slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy bay steeds, Indra, far away
2 They shall not harm the man who brings thee praises: such as I am, Agni my help approves me.
2 Vena draws up his wave from out the ocean. mist-born, the fair one's back is made apparent,
4 The swans ye have are friendly, rich in store of mcath, gold-pinioned, strong to draw, awake at early
5 Archer-like, fain toshoot, he sets his arrow, and whets his splendour like the edge of iron:
10. The two sages Alert and Watchful, the sleepless and the vigilant, these two guardians of thy life's breath, are
fourfold Stoma is the highest of Stomas, the three-night sacrifice the highest of sacrifices, the horse the
10 Him fair of face, rapid, and fair to look on, him very wise may we who know not follow.
g Be the water and plants friendly to us [2]; be they hostile to him who hateth us and whom we hate.
3 We balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rapturous joy:
5. With hymns and holy eulogies we supplicate your Agni, Lord
14 To us and to our cattle may Soma give salutary food,
As Susna's slayer I brandished the dart of death: I gave not up the Aryan name to Dasyu foes.
reflected, 'They have been born for me from the remains; if I eat first, then stronger ones will be born
Strong in the glory of our noble offspring, subdue the godless when they seek the battle.
3. O Maghavan, the hostile army which contends against us--do ye, O Indra, Vritra's slayer, and Agni, burn
along the furrows, for propagation. In twelve furrows he scatters; the year has twelve months; verily
10 Let our songs come anear to him beauteous and bright with piercing flame
the Brhat and the Rathantara (Samans). The Rathantara is this (earth), the Brhat yonder (sky); verily
Brought by a singer such as I who offers gifts and toils for thee.
a Go to the ocean, hail! Go to the atmosphere, hail! Go to god Savitr, hail! Go to day and night, hail! Go
harms the belly of the Brahman. 'With the holy power (Brahman) of Brhaspati', (he said), for he is fullest
year old. He, who knowing thus buys the Soma with a red brown cow one year old, buys the Soma with
5 Him who brake down the walls with deadly weapons, and gave the Mornings to anoble Husband,
24. Thou art, (O plant), a maiden, Taudî by name.; Ghritâkî, forsooth, is thy name. Underfoot is thy place: I take in
with Soma; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who is afraid of impotence should offer ,an oblation of
In war men call on thee, Indra, the hero's Lord, in the steed's race-course call on thee
16 Vast, the House-Friend, he set the waters flowing, all-lucid, widely spread, that move together.
Far from us still be Varuna's displeasure may Indra give us spacious room to dwell in.
3. Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake and Prisana, wrought in battle.
3. He shall not fly hither to slaughter (our) men; to keep (our) men sound he shall settle here! Charm .him very far
We know the nature of thy mind. Verity thou wilt give us naught.
Go to the foemen, strike them home, and let not one be left alive!
13 Mortals have brought to life the God Immortal, the Conqueror with mighty jaws, unfailing.
Mightiest with his Friends in his own courses. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
cattle, they Chandomas cattle; verily in force and find support. (The rite) is of fifteen nights; the bolt is
dappled for all the deities; the white-spotted hornless ones are for Indra and Surya.
for Indra and Vayu is speech, that for Mitra and Varuna is the eye, that for the Açvins is the ear; he eats
1. AT Jatavedas' holy gathering I will tell aloud the conquering might of the swift red-hued Steer.
8 King Varuna hath made a spacious pathway, a pathway for the Sun wherein to travel.
2.1.6.7 Mantra 7: The Putting of the Sticks on the Fire and the Vow
5 Maruts, this hero strength and majesty of yours hath, like the Sun, extended o'er a lengthened way,
To Brhaspati he offers an oblation in the house of the Brahman (priest); the sacrificial fee is a whitebacked (animal). (He offers) to Indra on eleven potsherds in the house of a Rajanya; the sacrificial fee is
became of bay colour, he saw these (cups) for the Maruts, to save himself;' he drew them [2]; verily with
33 As Priest, O Indra, give us wealth in brave men and good steeds ana kine
2 May Naratarhsa aid us at Prayaja: blest be our Anuyaja at invokings.
6 Let Sindhu with his wave bedew your horses: in fiery glow have the red birds come hither.
5 Sing glory now to Indra, say to him your solemn eulogies.
Fly unto us with noblest food, like birds, O ye of mighty power.
12. The one hundred and one persons whom the earth did cast off, because they had injured the offspring of a
27. A woman may lose her husband to death. Such a woman may find a new husband and dedicate her love to
3 The whip is laid upon the flank. The heroes stretch their thighs apart,
those which gained horns and those which won strength. He who ceases after ten months is prosperous,
Sattra where there is no Chandoma; in that there axe Chandomas, there is the Sattra. The gods they win
2 Let it approach, yoked by thewill, three-seated, extending far and wide o'er fivefold beings,
7 Around, consuming the broad earth, he wanders, free roaming like an ox without a herdsman,Agni refulgent, burning up the bushes, with blackened lines, as though the earth he seasoned.
He, rich in food, unbars his wealth like doors: he, the House-Friend, bath decked heaven's vault with
they win the world of men. These come to ten; the Viraj is of ten syllables, the Viraj is food; verily they
(sky) impregnates, finds support in this (earth), it is propagated, it becomes plants [1] and shoots; them
In full accord with Savitar, Divine One; in full accord with floods that pour forth riches.
1. AGNI hath looked, benevolently-minded, on the wealth-giving spring of radiant Mornings.
whose divine power the Universe reflects; He, O men, is the Lord.
who knows thus reaches not destruction from Soma. When they press Soma they kill him; he keeps back
3 Soma and Savitar the God have made thee a victorious King
12 Harness the Red Mares to thy car, the Bays, O God, the flaming ones:
verily by the impure he redeems its impurity and making it pure takes it. There are twenty-one; man is
13 May this God Savitar, the Lord, the Offspring of Waters, pouring down his dew be gracious,
11 Like Manu, we will stablish thee, Agni, performer of the rite,
5 When the united pair were rent asunder all the Gods complained.
1. THE Ancient's Milch-cow yields the things we long for: the Son of Daksina travels between them.
'By I sacrifice to the divine strew, may I be possessed of children', he says; by the strew Prajapati created
f Homage to him of the hole,' and to him of the abyss.
Who gives the wives we seek, whose succour fails not, to hasten, like a pitcher to the fountain.
6 They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strong-winged bird that mounteth sky-ward;
I. This day with praises, Agni, we bring thee that which thou lovest.
down from his secret dwelling place. See La Religion Vedique, ii. 394 f.
10 Thine is the Herald's task and Cleanser's duly timed; Leader art thou, and Kindler for the pious man.
6 In the floods' track he found the bootyseeker: the rocky cow-pen's doors he threw wide open.
sacrificer. He delights those who eat the offerings with curds, and those who do not with honey; curds is
2 May your pure steeds, rain-drinkers, bring you hither, swift as the tempest, your celestial coursers,
and by both forms they go to the world of heaven. There are Atiratras on either side, for security.
10. This, Indra! dancer! was thy hero deed, thy first and ancient work, worthy to be told forth in heaven,
Determination is seen in the unintelligent and ignorant too. But it is the obstinacy that arises from fear, despair, and pride. For instance, some people are victims of a fear-complex, and it is interesting to see how they hold on to it with great tenacity, as if it is an inseparable part of their personality. There are others who make their life a living hell because they cling to some past disappointment and refuse to let go of it, despite observing its ruinous impact upon them. Some insist upon quarreling with all who hurt their ego and its imagined conception of themselves. Shree Krishna states that determination based upon such stubborn clinging to unproductive thoughts is in the mode of ignorance.
2. Strike down the wizards, strike down him that prepares spells (against us); slay thou, moreover, O plant, him
4 What time the Guest hath made himself apparent, at ease reclining in the rich man's dwelling,
rite) of twenty one nights, shine also. (The rite) is of twenty-one nights, the Ekavinça (Stoma) is
Is not to be transgressed, O Gods. O mortals, ye behold it not. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
13 He lays his blows upon their backs, he deals his blows upon their thighs.
3. Then, like a steed, have they adorned the inciter for eternal life,
Ten hundred stood together: there I looked on this the most marvellous Deities' one chief glory.
Agni, the sages in assemblies never minish the portion due to thee the Mighty.
Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Maghavan, who maketh whole the injured part.
As ye, gay Gods, accept in splendid weather the sacrifice among these folk of Manus.
When from the hoof of your strong horse ye showered a hundred jars of honey for the people.
4. The Asvins first, Mitra and Varuna both, all the gods, and the Maruts, shall call thee! Then fix thy mind upon the
4 He, while he is adorned by the ten skilful ones, that he too in the Midmost Mothers may create,
13. (The pains) that split the crown (of the head), pierce the head, without doing injury, without causing disease,
22 Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to slaughter Vrtra who
oblation made of barley; the sacrificial fee is a cow for draught purposes.
10 May those five Bulls which stand on high full in the midst of mighty heaven,
13. Liberality, accomplishment, possession, the call svadhâ, nurture, immortality (amrita), and might, all inner
the all-conquering, as the bowstring (is loosened) from the bow, as chariots (from horses).
made up by the half-months; the Viraj is the year; he obtains the Viraj. For seventeen nights should he
g Homage to the most bountiful, and to the bearer of the arrow.
For help have I invoked you rich in power and might: for, house by house, ye visit all.
2. At the tip of my tongue may I have honey, at my tongue's root the sweetness of honey! In my power alone shalt
g This gift of thine, Agni, cometh, impelled by the Soma.
when he is about to remove the fire; in that there is (an offering) on eight potsherds, the Gayatri has
Agni on eight potsherds, an oblation to Soma, to Savitr on twelve potsherds, to Sarasvati an oblation, to
12 Indra is he, O men, who gives us happiness: sport, urge the giver of delight to win us strength
When shall thy songs of festival be sung thee? When is thy friendship shown within our dwelling?
art the sitter on the eagle; thou art the sitter on the vault.
4 With changing tints she gleams in double splendour while from the eastward she displays her body.
verily by them do they proceed to the world of heaven. (The rite is one) of twenty-four nights. Twenty
Often people argue that God cannot have hands, feet, eyes, ears, etc. But Shree Krishna says that God has all these, and to an innumerable extent. We should never fall into the trap of circumscribing God within our limited understanding. He is kartumakartuṁ anyathā karatuṁ samarthaḥ “He can do the possible, the impossible, and the reverse of the possible.” For that all-powerful God, to say that He cannot have hands and feet, is placing a constraint upon Him.However, God’s limbs and senses are divine, while ours are material. The difference between the material and the transcendental is that while we are limited to one set of senses, God possesses unlimited hands and legs, eyes, and ears. While our senses exist in one place, God’s senses are everywhere. Hence, God sees everything that happens in the world, and hears everything that is ever said. This is possible because, just as He is all-pervading in creation, His eyes and ears are also ubiquitous. The Chhāndogya Upaniṣhad states: sarvaṁ khalvidaṁ brahma (3.14.1) “Everywhere is Brahman.” Hence, He accepts food offerings made to Him anywhere in the universe; He hears the prayers of His devotees, wherever they may be; and He is the Witness of all that occurs in the three worlds. If millions of devotees venerate Him at the same time, He has no problem in accepting the prayers of all of them.
between the Ahavaniya and the oblation-holder he should pour (it) down [4]; verily he bestows upon
He only knowing works assigns their priestly tasks. Yea, lofty is the praise of Savitar the God.
2.6.6.6 Mantra 6: The Victim for Tvastr with the Wives of the Gods
And yet these two, the dark, the red, are Sisters. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
4 Borne on your golden car, ye omnipresent! come to this sacrifice of ours, Nasatyas.
fear in his house before the year (was over). 'Recite, let us two rejoice',' he responds, and thereby he
wives', he says, for pairing; 'in unison with the god Tvastr drink the Soma', he says; Tvastr is the maker
2 O Asvins, like a pair of deer, like two wild cattle to the mead:
7 Drink of the strong pressed out by strong ones, Indra, that which the Falcon brought thee when thou
butter left over, in it he should cook a mess for the Brahmans, four Brahmans should eat it; the Brahman
1. MAY Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by Holy Law is strong and active,
5 May I, Adityas, share m this your favour which, Aryaman, brings profit e'en in danger.
6 Stirrer to action of the poor and lowly, of priest, of suppliant who sings his praises;
b Sit on the billows as thy place of rest; sit on the ocean as thy place of rest; sit on the stream as thy
11 Vadhryasva's Agni evermore hath vanquished his foes with heroes who had pressed the Soma.
minstrel; the sacrificial fee is a great castrated (ox). To the Maruts (he offers) on seven potsherds in the
Prajapati [3]. They sing five (verses) standing; verily they win the world of the gods; five sitting; verily
They have approached the mixing-vessel as a sea: the cheerer streams for the carouse.
7 Who scatter clouds about the sky, away over the billowy sea:
1. Agni, the bright face of the Dawns, is shining: the singers' pious voices have ascended.
4 Not one is found among them, none of mortals, to blame our sires who fought to win the cattle.
3 As the exalted horn of bulls for splendid might, as the Sun's eye set in the firmament's expanse,
7 Men beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be beautified,
11 Come to us either from anear, Or, Sakra, come from far away.
1. O Indra, thou art far-renowned, impetuous Lord of power and might.
When flying off thou singest thou art like a lute. With brave sons in assembly may we speak aloud.
22. The strength of this amrita (ambrosia) do we crive this man to drink. Moreover, I prepare a remedy, that he
2 . May that gangida protect us as a treasurer his treasures, he whom the gods and the Brâhmanas made into a
hand the world has no sympathy for the rich person who does not give.
16 Thine, Indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest the mid-most wealth,
q In the sky make firm the gods, in the atmosphere the birds, on earth the creatures of earth.
Viçvakarman; the three with piebald bellies are (to be offered) to Dhatr; the white-spotted hornless ones
Sages in wisdom, ye are knit to him who seeketh you as friends. Heroes, bestow on him his wish.
No providence but yours alone is with me so have I wrought for you this hymn for succour.
5 When through his power and in his strong prevailing flames the Maruts' gladdening boons mingle with
Wherewith thou hast spread wide the air's mid-region-bright is that splendour, wavy, man-beholding.
6 In thee, O Food, is set the spirit of great Gods.
pile (it) on earth, he would afflict the earth with pain; nor trees, nor plants would [1] be born; if he
8 For ancient Sayti in his sore affliction ye caused his cow to swell with milk, O Asvins.
Although he deemed himself alone unequalled, another had been born e'en yet more potent.
Shree Krishna has revealed to Arjun his will that the Kauravas should perish and the kingdom of Hastinapur should be administered by the Pandavas in accordance with rules of dharma. He has already decided the annihilation of the unrighteous and the victory of the righteous as the outcome of the battle. His grand scheme for the welfare of the world cannot be averted by any means. He now informs Arjun that he wishes him to be the nimitta-mātram, or the instrument of his work. God does not need the help of a human for his work, but humans attain eternal welfare by working to fulfill God’s wish. Opportunities that come our way to accomplish something for the pleasure of the Lord are a very special blessing. It is by taking these opportunities that we attract his special grace, and achieve our permanent position as the servant of God.Shree Krishna also encourages Arjun to be his instrument by reminding him of the exceptional skills he has received in the art of archery by his grace. Hence, he addresses him with the vocative savya-sāchin, meaning expert archer, since Arjun is admirably ambidextrous and is able to discharge arrows with either hand.
and who are elders and worthy of respect. May wealth not make me arrogant; may you grant me
9 Agni, thine home is in the floods: into the plants thou forcest way,
4 That Indra will we laud in our assemblies, him who is Lord of great and lasting riches,
Sweet to thine heart, O Indra, is the brew which she who tends thee pours. Supreme is Indra over all.
Varuna give tliee what is more than ample, and in thy triumph may the Gods be joyful.
The brilliant one, hath sent forth hither all the Dawns: spotless, one-minded, zealous in their home they dwell, with
8 Thrice-sixty Maruts, waxing strong, were with thee, like piles of beaming light, worthy of worship.
17 With endless genial flow the Strong hath run, purified by the waters, blent with milk.
May they who give good gifts, the Maruts, come to us. Indra, most swift, be thou with them.
10 This is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thou shonest forth.
2 That Agni, when in loftiest heaven he sprang to life, Guardian of Holy Laws, kept and observed them
'Along the eastern quarter do thou advance, wise one', he says; verily with this (verse) he moves to the
Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, Thunder-armed, make all our pathways pleasant
eight half-hooves; verily he wins cattle. (He puts down) six on the Marjaliya; the seasons are six, the
2. Active, while being purified, he hath assailed all enemies: they deck the Sage with holy hymns.
3 The lofty axle of thy wheels, O Hero, is not surpassed by heaven and earth in greatness.
11 This young Maid from the east hath shone upon us; she harnesseth her team of bright red oxen.
him (a piece) without fat; cattle are distinguished by fat; verily by means of their distinctive mark he
a To I earth thee! To atmosphere thee! To sky thee!
Come to his house whose holy grass is trimmed, to dear sacrifice at the morning rites.
28. O king Bhava, be merciful to thy worshipper, for thou art the lord of living beasts! He who believes the gods
Looker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord, Indra! of what moveth not.
48 Now, chariot-borne, flow unto us, God Soma, as thou art purified flow to the saucers,
Favour us thou who hast the Maruts for thy friends: stir up the bounty of our chiefs.
d Thou art pure, thou art nectar, thou art the sacrifice for all the gods.
One lustre waits upon thee moving to the cast, and, Surya, thou arisest with a different light.
28. Thou, the remedy called p6tudru, art the body of Agni, the deliverer, slayer of Rakshas, slayer of rivals,
19. O Vâkaspati, good cheer and spirit, cattle in our stable, children in our wombs beget thou! Right here life's
embryo for me, the calves', he says; that is the form of cattle; verily by the form he wins cattle. He offers
3 What time the flowing Soma-drops have gladdened with their taste the Friend,
Soma have not bases. Taking (the cup) for Indra and Vayu he should sprinkle it (saying), 'May the
May we uninjured, girt by many heroes, win Varuna's and Mitra's high protection.
perforated bricks in the quarters, the sacrificer with Agni with eyes on all sides goes to the world of
6. The spell which they have put for thee into the assembly-hall, that which (they have put) into the gaming-place,
6 Like as he is beheld such is he said to be.
At whose close touch things solid shake, and what is stable yields like trees.
says, for what one thinks in the mind one expresses in speech. 'Thou art mind', he says; for what one
Inclining hither bring us help, O Agni, even assistance most desired by Indra.
Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self, O man.
3 Him whom they made to drive away the darkness, Lords of sure mansions, constant to their object,
6 Watch ye, through this your truthfulness, there in the place of spacious view
11. This 'firm' direction (nadir) is Virâg (brilliancy): reverence be to her; may she be kind to my children and to me!
b On the instigation of the god Savitr, through Brhaspati, winner of the prize, may I mount the highest
cause strife with the gods. 'Better than good have the gods brought together', he says, for the eating of
11 Agni, beheld by us in nearest neighbourhood, accordant with the Gods, bring us, with gracious love,
So, bright as Mitra is, burn him who injures us, him who plots ill against thy friend.
15 Soma, pour blessings on our kine, pour forth the food that streams with milk
Like a most famous car, Agni the purely bright, like Mitra. to be glorified among the folk.
The Gods uphold that King with their protection who helps the Brahman when he seeks his favour.
So have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, of independent glory, roaring as it runs.
Agastya. This indeed is so much as that, verily he takes away so much as is theirs. If at the early
Awakening the world with purple horses, on her well-harnessed chariot Dawn approaches.
without piling the gravel in support, he should separate the sand; verily he pours forth for him the seed
And, having drunk his fill of flowing Soma, baffled the guileful Danava's devices.
Here, Shree Krishna has given the example of the breeze to explain the process of transmigration of a soul from one body into another. Similar to the breeze, which carries with it the fragrances of the flowers, upon the death of the gross body, the soul carries with it the subtle and the causal bodies, these include the senses and the mind. (The concept of three kinds of bodies has been explained in detail in Verse 2.28).Even when the material body dies, the soul continues to carry the mind along with the experiences of its past lifetimes from its former body to the new one. That explicates why people who are born blind can still dream, probably based on their experiences from past lives. Dreams are considered to be a visual representation of what we see or think during waking hours. It might be in a distorted or rambled form, which gets connected in our mind when we sleep. For example, someone saw a bird flying and thought, “How wonderful will it be to fly like a bird!” Sometime later, he dreams that he is flying in his human body itself. Yet, a blind person who has not seen anything from birth dreams, this can only be due to all the impressions that are stored in the subconscious mind, which it carries with it from past lifetimes.In the next verse, Shree Krishna explains what the soul does with the mind and senses it takes with it when it departs from its present body.
7 Thou hast spread out wide earth, a mighty marvel, and, high thyself, propped lofty heaven, O Indra.
6 The flames with curling tresses serve your sacrifice, whereto ye sing the song, Mitra and Varuna.
8. No mortal man can e'er prevail by arts of magic over him
2. Thou art alike in many a place: through all the regions thou art Lord.
Him who beholds the universe, the Sun-God, seven strong and youthful Coursers carry onward.
b The foe shall he pierce and wealth he doth gain
Thou, Maghavan, rentest with thy bolt the Dragon who lay against the waterfloods of heaven.
overcome, so his fire is overcome, and with it being overcome the sacrificer is overcome; he having
universal remedy, stands together with soma. Destroy thou every takman, and all female spooks!
is a bull as a beast of burden. (He offers) to Indra and Agni on twelve potsherds, and an oblation (caru)
Of the Adityas, of the Maruts the mighty host-The voice hath ascended of the gods
give a red draught animal with good characteristics, destroying foes. He who knowing thus gives a red
4. With might. producing glare, the juice enters the purifying sieve,
The Adhvaryu is he that brings trouble on the sacrificer, and he that brings trouble himself is ruined
1.9.24 Mantra 24 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Asita Kasyapa, Devala Kasyapa)
Even from far away come thou unto our feast, or listen if already here.
nights; verily he surrounds himself with the divine citadels; no harm whatever can befall him, the
metres. 'All have caused Indra to wax', he says; verily he attains increase. 'True lord and lord of strength'
3 Splendid, O Singer, is that man, mightiest of the great in heaven.
verily he bestows radiance on him; he is radiant. He who desires brilliance should offer a cake on eight
Being, all intelligence, who created the universe by contemplation of what he wanted to do.
14 Speed forward hither, come to us, rejoice thee in the milky draught:
As pleasure at the ford invites the thirsty, as the long way brings him who gains his object.
3. Indu flow on, a mighty juice; glorify us among the folk: drive all our enemies away!
12 Give up the people who are high and haughty to these men and to me, O Thunder-wielder!
these (offerings), he prospers by them. That to Sarasvant is on twelve potsherds, for pairing, for
11 Of this we have no knowledge. Tall it forth to us, now the youth rests within the chambers of the
22 Pray thou to Agni, pray to him who blazes served with sacred oil:
To these, for their high station, 1 bow down with song, to Indra, Agni, bow with song.
2 Let Aditi rejoice and the Adityas, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, most righteous.
He, the most Godlike, far-extending envoy, shines with flames ancient, resonant, whitely-shining.
5 Give us, O liberal Lord, great gtore of riches, for, Agni, such art thou when duly kindled.
1. THOU Agni, God mid mortal men, art guard of sacred rites, thou art
place where (he spends) less time than that [2] Now Vastospati is Rudra. If he were to go on without
8 May they who formed the swift car, bearing Heroes, and the Cow omniform and all-impelling,
b Thou art taken with a support; thee that sittest in the waters, that sittest in the ghee, that sittest in the
danger?), those who are (like) dark goats, and those, too, who bleat like goats, all those, do thou, O Arbudi, make
should offer (a beast) with a spot on the forehead and horns bent forward to Indra of the thunderbolt.
He, yet enveloped in his Mother's bosom, source of much life, hath sunk into destruction.
2 He who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggered, and set at rest the agitated mountains,
8 The active, fleet-foot, tawny Coursers that are thine are swift to victory, like the Wind,
they made rain to fall, and with the Vasat call they caused the thunder to roll. Then for them the quarters
6 Spinning the thread, follow the region's splendid light: guard thou the path ways well which wisdom
the Lord of Power, their speech he steals away from them,
The sages guard the seat of Holy Order, and keep the highest names concealed within them.
Bring hitherward the car with seats where eight may sit, whereon the Gods have brought the treasure
2 Lead us anew to happiness, O Agni; lead us beyond all danger and affliction.
16 That pathway of the Sun in heaven, made to be highly glorified,
2 Readily have the purple beams of light shot up; the Red Cows have they harnessed, easy to be
46. For the sake of truth and holy strength do we make over this porridge as a hoarded treasure to the gods: it
17. Enveloped in grass, clothed in reeds, like night does the house lodge the cattle; erected thou dost stand upon
5 Spreading with radiant limbs throughout the region, purging his power with wise purifications,
Having made up the month with the six-day periods they leave out a day, for they behold the months by
3 And, drinker at due seasons, drink in season, Indra, with friendly Gods, our pressed-out Soma.
Striving within the votary's house thou drivest all the glooms away.
33 As strong I call on thee the Strong, O Thunderer with thy thousand aids:
Be like two dogs that injure not our bodies; preserve us, like two crutches, that we fall not.
he must hold it when he calls; verily he loses not his own. If he begins the litany without placing the
along; for distinction. 'Thou art the share of the Raksases ', (with these words) he casts the strew, having
When the most liberal God, for Paktha, rescued his parents, and assailed the seven Hotras.
8 Tle streams of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra-Varuna,Well-knowing through his mighty powers.
4. When the season has arrived, and Prâna calls aloud to the plants, then everything rejoices, whatsoever is upon
Lightly, with piercing ends, as 'twere two ranks of heroes ranged for fight.
4 Well is it known, O Mighty Ones: ye open heaven; for you the chariotsteeds are yoked for morning
4 To noblest Agni, Friend of man, best Vrtra-slayer, are we come,
5 All thy kind thoughts, O Raka, lovely in their form, wherewith thou grantest wealth to him who offers
8 When will he trample, like a weed, the man who hath no gift for him?
do thou (Rudra) with it show mercy to us, that we may live!
The central point of all that moves and moves not, the while they wove the Sage's thread with insight
9. With strength let Mitra, Varuna swell oblations; do thou prepare for us rich food, O Indra!
When thou, fierce Lord of the Bay Steeds, the Stayer, blewest from earth and heaven and sky the
for him, he offered this (offering) to Indra on eleven potsherds, and thereby he bestowed power upon
For those who long for his approach, for those who turn away from him.
12 So, too, I hear of thee as in due season urging to action and enriching singers.
8 God! May we listen with our ears to what is good;
'With the Pavamana Stoma thee', he says; verily thereby he bestows breath upon him. 'By the Brhat and
offering. To Agni, the gatherer, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds; this when cooked and put in
11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thbu Mother of Strong Sons
prosperously among men'; Aryaman is yonder sun; verily he has recourse to Aryaman with his own
obtains the kingdom and food. To him they gave that share which they cut off for Agni Svistakrt. In that
O Son of Strength, clad in the robe of riches, may we escape from woe as from
of mine; may Indra together with the Rishis (take note of it)!
Ye send the fighter hand to hand, armmighty, and the brave hero, Maruts with good horses.
11 Now, Indra! lauded, glorified with praises, let powers swell high, like rivers, for the singer.
(earth). Therefore yonder (sky) is adorned with the Naksatras, this (earth) with variegated things. He
The season-cups are drawn for the world of heaven; Indra and Agni are the light; in that he draws the
16. The amulet which Brihaspati tied for swift Vâta, wearing that the gods did conquer all the worlds in battle; that
8 This song of bright contents for you is swelling in the men's hall where three-fold grass is.ready.
the year; verily they consecrate themselves grasping the year at the beginning. In that there is no
10 May we this day be dearest friends of Indra, and let us call on him in fight to-morrow.
Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, O Blessed, and come thyself, exalted, to our worship.
with cattle and propagate him with offspring. Yonder sun did not shine; the gods desired an atonement
4 I, to enjoy the beauty of his form, behold that rapid rush of his as 'twere an axe's edge,
13 Bound to three pillars captured Sunahsepa thus to the Aditya made his supplication.
6 Sunk in the pit the Rsi Kutsa called, to aid, Indra the Vrtra-slayer, Lord of power and might.
9 He on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend nath roared and thundered like the summit
Drive away those who hate us, bring us riches: pour bounty, opulent Lady, on the singer.
a This Soma is pressed for you, O Mitra and Varuna,
For me ten bright-hued oxen have come forward like lotus-stalks from out a lake upstanding.
human speech; the wild goat, the ichneumon, the Çaka, these are for Pusan; the curlew to speech.
The Puranas relate the story of the sacrifice offered by the great sage Dadhichi, which was unparalleled in history. Indra, the king of heaven was once driven out of his celestial kingdom by a demon named Vritrasura. The demon had a boon whereby he could not be killed by any weapon known till then. In desperation, Indra approached Lord Shiv for help, who took him to Lord Vishnu. Vishnu revealed to Indra that the only weapon that could kill Vritrasura was a thunderbolt made from the bones of the sage Dadhichi. Indra then beseeched Dadhichi to make the ultimate sacrifice of laying down his life so that his bones could be used for making the thunderbolt. Dadhichi accepted the request, but desired to first go on a pilgrimage to all the holy rivers. Indra then brought together all the waters of the holy rivers to Naimisharanya, thereby allowing the sage to have his wish fulfilled without further loss of time. Dadhichi then gave up his body by the practice of yogic techniques. The thunderbolt made from his bones was then used to defeat the demon Vritrasura, allowing Indra to regain his place as the king of the celestial abodes. Shree Krishna deliberately refers to this thunderbolt here as the representation of the glory of God, preferring it above the mace and disc that are always held in the hands of Lord Vishnu.In this verse, Shree Krishna also reveals that the act of sexual intercourse is not unholy when it is performed for the sole purpose of begetting good children. Kaamdev, the god of love (cupid), is responsible for the force of attraction between the opposite sexes that facilitates the continuance of humankind through procreation. This sexual urge has its origin in God, and should not be mis-utilized for sensual enjoyment, but rather be used solely for the purpose of begetting worthy progeny. In verse 7.11 as well, Shree Krishna had declared that he is the sexual desire that is not in conflict with virtue and scriptural injunctions.
1 With the power of speech that you granted us, we gave names to things, O Lord! You lovingly gave
5 Ever victorious, through the Maruts, be this band of Heroes, nursing manly strength,
Let him indeed, the holy one, prepare remedies for thee, together with the (earthly) physician!
2 At every laud the Soma gladdens Indra: pressed juices please him as each psalm is chanted,
(Saying) 'On the impulse of the god Savitr thee', he takes the sword, for impelling. 'With the arms of the
They go swiftly in that it is the tenth day. In that it is the tenth day they loosen their sins. He who among
O Indra, turn thee hitherward invited by us thy friends; be seated and be joyful.
3. Soma, as thou art purified, incite to bounty Indra's heart,
safety. Thou art the vulture, with the Jagati for thy metre; I grasp thee; bring me over in safety', he says.
I. I SEND my voice as herald to the Rbhus; I crave the white cow for the overspreading.
metre; the bull in strength, the Satobrhati metre; the bullock in strength, the Kakubh metre; the milch
6 Prosperity we crave from thee, afar from sin and near to wealth,
3. For Indra, thunder-armed, the kine have yielded mingled milk and meath,
would afflict domestic animals with pain; if (with that) of wild (animals), wild (animals); he should offer
2. Down in the mighty waters sinks the stream of Meath, most excellent,
do not please God. Only those who stay away from sins and from denigrating others and make a pious
I will divide, without a fight, his riches who warreth here, against the Bull, with women.
Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit,-pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudhanas.
5. When, by the law of the Most High, in presence of heaven and earth, the fond mind's utterance formed him.
Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a son, the issue of his father.
4. Agni, spread forth, as ruler, over living things: give wealth, to
Like swans they show the beauty of their bodies, like horses in their play they bite and nibble.
they delighted by him carry the offering to the gods. The Angirases were the last to go hence to the
closed in, to prevent the Raksases entering; the Yajya, and the Anuvakya are Raksas-slaying, to lay low
2 To be invoked and hymned in fight with Vrtra, that well-praised Indra gives us real bounties.
root! Do thou here cunningly loosen the fetter of Grâhi (attack of disease); may all the gods give thee leave!
upon.(gagrâha) his joints! Do thou, moreover, O plant, lead him forth to the world of the living!
wins strength. It is level with his mouth; verily from the mouth (downwards) he wins strength for him.
13. As many in number and in kind the plants here are upon the earth, may they, furnished with a thousand
heroic hearted; 'goer' is thy name; do thou follow the course of the Adityas.
Just like there are two sides to a coin, so too God created this world full of dualities—there is day and night, sweet and sour, hot and cold, rain and drought, etc. The same rose bush has a beautiful flower and also an ugly thorn. Life too brings its share of dualities—happiness and distress, victory and defeat, fame and notoriety. Lord Ram himself, in his divine pastimes, was exiled to the forest the day before he was to be crowned as the king of Ayodhya. While living in this world, nobody can hope to neutralize the dualities to have only positive experiences. Then how can we successfully deal with the dualities that come our way in life? The solution is to take these dualities in stride, by learning to rise above them in equipoise in all situations. This happens when we develop detachment to the fruits of our actions, concerning ourselves merely with doing our duty in life without yearning for the results. When we perform works for the pleasure of God, we see both positive and negative fruits of those works as the will of God, and joyfully accept both.
Most sweet-voiced Turvayana poured oblations like floods of widely fertilizing water.
6 Thou dealest gifts, resplendent One; nigh, as with waves of Sindhu, thou
54. In many ways heaven assumes within itself a different form, according to circumstances. It (the heaven) has
connects. 'Thou art the thread; for offspring thee! Quicken offspring' [3], he says; verily the Pitrs and
So that with us, ye Twain whose backs are sprinkled with oil, the priests with oil and hymns support
10. For so thou art the brave man's friend; a hero, too, art thou, and strong:
They have come nigh to you as treasurelovers, like mares, fleet-footed, eager for the glory.
2. Come hither to the light of the living; I rescue thee unto a life of a hundred autumns! Loosing the bands of death
2. Thou art the most excellent of remedies, the best of plants, as Soma (the moon) is the lord in the watches of
With three close Friends to length of days he cometh, he whom men let not rest at home in quiet.
2 Drive, Pusan, from our road the wolf, the wicked inauspicious wolf,
Who in fights ever conquer evil-hearted men, who overcome the enemy.
Knowing Eternal Law, the earliest light of heaven, he, passing wise, was chosen out to tell it forth.
8 O Indra, God who movest round about us, feed us with varied food plenteous as waterFood wherewithal, O Hero, thou bestowest vigour itself to flow to us for ever.
13 I call thee when the Sun is risen, I call thee at the noon of day:
From the middle of holy power he bore out holy power,
1. EAGER for spoil my flow of speech I utter: may the Floods' Child accept my songs with favour.
3 Remember Kanva first of all among the singers, Asvins, who
4 To Rudra Lord of sacrifice, of hymns and balmy medicines,
4 Maruts, your mightiness deserves to be adored, sight to be longed for like the shining of the Sun.
1. SURYA hath sent aloft his beams of splendour o'er all the tribes of men in countless places.
3. Thou, Agni, art spread widely forth, Priest dear and excellent through thee
the sacrifice, enjoying long life', he says; verily he confers long life upon himself and attains security
For, when beset with slight or sore affliction, we ever call upon the Gods, the Maruts;
pain reach N.N. [1], whom we hate', he says; verily he afflicts him whom he hates with its hunger and
5. Loud singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows we priests invoke
These pegs are fastened to the seat of worship: they made the Sama-hymns their weaving shuttles.
sacrifice they keep renewing it. At two pressings he draws off by means of embers, at the third with
hair, with a Yajus, for destruction. Indra slew Vrtra; his eyeball fell away; it became collyrium. When he
1. I call the name of him that comes here, that hath come here, and is arriving; I crave (the name) of Indra, Vritra's
Who come at early morn, the host of heaven, to drink the Soma juice
In the previous verse, Shree Krishna explained that both the sensations of happiness and distress are fleeting. He now encourages Arjun to rise above these dualities through discrimination. In order to develop this discrimination, we first need to understand the answers to two important questions: 1) Why do we aspire for happiness? 2) Why doesn’t material happiness satisfy us?The answer to the first question is very simple. God is an ocean of infinite bliss, and we souls are his tiny parts. This basically means that we are tiny fragments of an infinite ocean of bliss. Swami Vivekananda would address people by saying, “O ye children of immortal bliss.” Just as a child is drawn to his or her mother, each part is naturally drawn toward its whole. Similarly, being infinitesimal parts of the ocean of bliss, we souls too are drawn to this bliss. Hence, everything we do in the world is for the sake of happiness. We all may have different views regarding where happiness lies or what form it might take, but all living beings seek nothing apart from it. This answers the first question.Now, let’s understand the answer to the second question. The soul, being a tiny part of God, is divine in nature like God himself. Hence the happiness that the soul seeks is also divine. Such happiness must possess the following three characteristics:It must be infinite in extent.It must be permanent.It must be ever-fresh.Such is the happiness of God, which is described as sat-chit-ānand, or eternal-sentient-ocean of bliss. However, the happiness we experience from the contact of the senses with their objects is the reverse; it is temporary, finite, and insentient. Thus, the material happiness that we perceive through the body can never satisfy the divine soul.With this discrimination, we must practice to tolerate the perception of material happiness. Similarly, we must tolerate the sensation of material distress. (This second aspect is discussed in detail in many future verses, such as 2.48, 5.20, etc.) Only then will we rise above these dualities and the material energy will no longer bind us.
May we rest ever in the loving-kindness, in the auspicious grace of him the Holy.
it away from them; if he were to put it with them, it would become spoiled. He makes it go forward with
2 With Bow let us win kine, with Bow the battle, with Bow be victors in our hot encounters.
4 The tawny Pavamana, who strews from of old the grass with might,
4 This, even this, is he who hath created the breadth of earth, the lofty height of heaven.
7. Knowing this, O salve, I shall speak the truth, avoid falsehood. May I obtain horses and cattle, and thy person,
11 He, Satakratu, even in fight acts as a Vrtra-slayer s,till:
8. As Aurva and as Bhrigu called, as Apnavana called, I call
Or with your Godlike natures stand upon your cars, come thence, O Asvins, hitherward.
9 When thou, with thunder and with roar, Parjanya, smitest sinners down,
6. The plant gîvalâ (quickening'), na-ghâ-rishâ ('forsooth-no-harm'), and gîvantî ('living), a victorious, mighty
6 Praise the strong, grasping Hero, winner of the spoil, ruling supreme oer mighty wealth.
10. Here is the Soma juice expressed. O Vasu, drink till thou art full:
5 Ye made for Tugra's son amid the water-floods that animated ship with wings to fly withal,
23 The Waters I this day have sought, and to their moisture have we come:
8 He who for ever vigilant precedes these Twain, the Day and Night,
shall we distinguish them.' She said, 'Let me choose a guerdon. Let the opening oblation in the sacrifice
5 The Friend, whom not the brilliant-hued, the badly-mixt or bitter draught,
1. BE with us; I have chosen thee: stand stedfast and immovable.
36 O Wealthy Gods, ye taste and find the brisk and watchful wild beast good.
True, Indra! crushing forts and slaying Dasyus: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
12 That vigorous band of Maruts that abidetb in the mountains, I
Seeking the light, with hymns to thee, O Indra, Kusikas have brought their gift, the singers.
23 The Sage, Celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours as he flows the Genuine for the Truthful.
7 Let us invoke today, to aid our labour, the Lord of Speech, the thought-swift Visvakarman.
Agni, may I become radiant; with the splendour that is thine, O Agni, may I become resplendent.
2. To thee, immortal! when to life thou springest all the Gods sing for joy as to their infant.
with the sacrifice to the gods they go to another sacrifice. They cleave asunder the sacrifice, in that (after
6 May he grant health into our steeds, wellbeing to our rams and ewes,
8 Around us is the Dasyu, riteless, void of sense, inhuman, keeping alien laws.
Their face that glows with splendour through their mighty power hath found the shine of heaven for
9 For thee, to be thine early draught, I pour the Soma-mingled meath:
5 Forth go the hymn that shone in Ghosa Bhrgu's like, the song wherewith the son of Pajra worships
Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his gains against his adversary.
thou come to me?' 'By the space-filler', he replied. He came to him by the space filler; therefore the
5. May the greatness of the gangida protect us about on all sides, (the greatness) with which he has overcome
Shree Krishna now poses many questions Himself, and asks Arjun to listen carefully to their answers.
1. For thee alone, O (death from) old age, this (boy) shall grow up: the other hundred kinds of death shall not
4.6.130Sukta 130 – Charm to arouse the passionate love of a Man
1. THOU helpest him whose grass is trimmed, who sheds the juice, O Satakratu, drink Soma to make
4 Sing a praise-song to Soma brown of hue, of independent might.
are not combined. He pours water over; therefore the vital airs are moist within. (The water) he pours is
pointed at both ends, for the winning of light both hence and from yonder world; it is a fathom long; so
3. Having made thee (the poison) that comes from a horizontal direction into a porridge, rich in fat, and cheering,
2 Whose lofty might-for doubly strong is he-supports the heavens and earth,
Indra the terrible, tamer of every man, as Arya leads away the Dasa at his will.
2 Agni of Divodasa turned, as 'twere in majesty, to the Gods.
May they the Well-born, Mighty, kindred of the Cow, aid us to food and to delight.
4 Absorbed into the heart, be sweet, O Indu, as a kind father to his son, O Soma,
given she is a thousand. Therefore one must not accept a boon; for she is a boon; verily he would be
world of the gods; fresh butter is as it were midway; therefore he anoints with fresh butter, along the
He only doth great deeds, the only Hero, sole Vrtra-slayer he, with none beside him.
stretched upwards and the gods piled round this Vaiçvanara, to overcome the world of heaven. The
Eager for wealth we call on Indra, Lord of wealth, on Satakratu with our lauds.
For no one may impair the gift laid up in thee. Bring me whatever thing I ask!
The Son of Conquest, passing men and heroes, kinewinner, mount thy conquering car, O Indra!
The human body houses five senses—the senses of sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing—and these, in contact with their objects of perception, give rise to sensations of happiness and distress. None of these sensations is permanent. They come and go like the changing seasons. Although cool water provides pleasure in the summer, the same water gives distress in the winter. Thus, both the perceptions of happiness and distress experienced through the senses are transitory. If we permit ourselves to be affected by them, we will sway like a pendulum from side to side. A person of discrimination should practice to tolerate both the feelings of happiness and distress without being disturbed by them.The technique of Vipassanā, which is the primary technique of self-realization in Buddhism, is based on this principle of tolerance of sense perceptions. Its practice helps eliminate desire, which, as stated in the four noble truths (the truth of suffering, the truth of the origin of suffering, the truth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth of the path leading to the cessation), is the cause of all suffering. This is not surprising considering that Buddhist philosophy is a subset of the vast Vedic philosophy.
Still do thou favour us, O Bolt-armed Maghavan: with strength hast thou rewarded hymns.
thee; for strength thee; for ploughing thee: for safety thee! (Thou art) the prop, ruling; thou art the firm,
2. The singers praise him with their song, and learned priests adorn the steed
5 Sacivan, win to your assistance Indra who never bends, who overcomes his foemen.
7 Your constant song hath been sent forth, Disposers! that flows threefold in mighty strength, O Asvins.
8. Hither to thee Savitar shall lead the husband that is agreeable! Do thou, O herb, bestow (him) upon her!
b Amba, Duhi, Nitatni, Abhrayanti, Meghayanti, Varsayanti, Cupunika, art thou by name, with
When thou art rapidly freed from thy parents, first eastward they bear thee round, and, after, to the
3. Flow rich in sweets and lovely for our Bhaga, Vayu, Pushan, fair
May we get booty from jur foe in battle, presenting to the Gods their share for glory.
Thou Lord of Heroes, Maghavan, our saver, art faithful, very rich, the victory-giver.
sacrifice does so with the wish, 'May it be in my seasons and the strength of the Naksatras' [2]. If they
5 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brhaspati,
N. N. from these quarters, from this sky'; verily having acquired these worlds of his foe he descends
God, working with mankind, flow on; to Indra go thy gladdening juice: to Vayu mount as Law commands!
3. Dhâtar (the creator) supports (didhhra) this earth, Dhâtar supports the heavens, and the sun. May Dhatar
11 When a man's daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, knowing, will be wroth with her for blindness?
He, Pusan Visnu, poured forth three great vessels to him, the juice that cheers, that slaughters Vrtra.
Tlat thou mayst be our own, joying in power, famed through thy might in every generation.
And over the Five Races let our glory shine high like the realm of light and unsurpassable.
animal, that which they have put into a sheep, that do I hurl back again.
r Homage to you horses, and to you, lords of horses, homage!
thousand rested; therefore the dwarf, stretched out, affords support to cattle when born. 'Who can obtain
pre-eminence, for N.N.'s pleasure; for life thee, for expiration thee, for inspiration thee, for crossbreathing thee, for dawning thee, for wealth thee, for prosperity thee, for sound thee, for nourishing thee,
They make the world-halves tremble with their greatness: from depths of earth and sky they reach to
therewith delights them. He puts round the enclosing-sticks of Butea frondosa, for the holding apart of
worlds; verily he attains reputation in these worlds; verily also he bestows breaths on himself.
Him who wins thousands at the sacrifice, himself, that Agni, reverence with songs!
4 He looks with Ioving favour on the mortal who, like a rich man, pours for him the Soma.
2 May the Floods' Offspring, he whose course is rapid, protect that wave most rich in sweets, O
me over in safety. Thou art the eagle, with the Tristubh for thy metre; I grasp thee; bring me over in
atmosphere he finds support. He offers to the oblations; verily in cattle he finds support. He offers to the
1. INVOKED to drink the Soma juice, come with thy Bay Steeds, Thunder-armed
The strong Free-giver, winning hundreds, thousands, hath reached the holy grass that never fails him.
9 Take up in beakers what remains: the Soma on the filter pour,
1. THOU, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kindled for the Gods.
Enthroned in oil, the Asura, bliss-giver, is Agni, firm support of noble, riches.
3 His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth: he puts forth endless vigour with a flash of light.
Dawns, hasting to the praises otthe pious, be pleased with us. both offerers and singers.
d Protect my life; protect my expiration; protect my inspiration; protect my cross-breathing; protect my
7 They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full of sweet juice, for faithful is his bounty.
Like falcons hasting eagerly to the quarry, roar loudly like the army of the Maruts.
5. This (man) shall live and shall not die: we rouse this man (to life)! I make for him a remedy: O death, do not slay
anything further, it would be just as when (a libation) falls outside the barriers. There are three Agnis,
the tongue (?)! How shalt thou then waste away? The Âdityas and Vasus, Indra and Agni shall raise thee up unto
1. FULL wise is he who hath discerned: let him speak to us of the Gods,The man whose praise-songs Varuna the beautiful, or Mitra, loves.
6 We know thee winner of the spoil, and resolute in battles, Sage!
With whom our friendship is most famed, and kinship passing that of Gods.
6 Fit for the grasping of his arms is what the Sire hath fabricated from all kind of precious wealth.
accompanied by the Caturvinça Stoma. The year has twenty-four half-months [3]; verily as they go on
metres, food indeed is as it were sap; verily by the sap of the metres he wins the sap that is food. He who
k May the steed, anointed with glee, of his own impulse
6 We call on thee both night and day to taste the flowing Soma juice:
covering [1] most healing; with that deity do thou sit firm in the manner of Angiras.
Thy horns are spread abroad in all directions: they move with restless beat in wildernesses.
Gandharvas and the Kasyapas lead forth, her the sages guard with diligence.
Excellent God, the drops run down upon thy skin. Deal them to each among the Gods.
Vaiçvanara on twelve potsherds; Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; when a man for a year goes about among
Devas Bhaga, Aryama, and the bounteous Savita have given thee to me, for you to become the ruler of
1. Swift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens his horns, terrific, stirring up the people.
13 With all his conquering vigour this Aditya hath gone up on high,
2 Hear this laud, Radiant Priest of many aspects, O Agni with the fires of man enkindled,
some creatures find support, in flesh others. The Asuras from above desired to turn round the earth; the
Darbhas are the ambrosia, the strength of the (earth); he offers on it; verily he is propagated. An eater of
2 He who brings gifts to him the Ancient and the Last, to Visnu who ordains, together with his Spouse,
he wins food. With four (verses) he goes up to the tail; the metres are four; verily (he goes) with the
9 He who gives glory unto all these living creatures with the song,
26 O Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons.
2 Your praise is like a mighty power, an impulse: to you, Twain Gods, a well-formed hymn is offered,
Who have not gone to the reverential cutting of the strew.
and at the back, must be bestrewed', they say; men [2] indeed desire what is bestrewed, and, how much
10. Soma, the mighty, when, the waters' offspring, he chose the Gods, performed that great achievement.
Inflamed and keen, refulgent in our gatherings, he lifts our hymn on high clad in his radiant hues.
excluded is he whom we hate. Thou art the step of Visnu, overcoming imprecations, mount the Tristubh
11 Fair as a bride embellished by her mother thou showest forth thy form that all may see it.
cuts off from Indra's (cake), he should say, 'Do thou recite for Indra'; having directed (the Agnidh) to
28 Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, swifter than thought is, like an awful lion.
Prajapati created offspring; he thought himself emptied, he saw this set of eleven (victims), with it he
The Maruts gifted with pure strength adore thee, for thou, O Indra, art their sapient Rsi.
10 She who flashed brilliant as the falling lightning brought me delicious presents from the waters.
brings them forward with mind; mind is this (earth) [1]; verily with this (earth) he brings them forward.
1. I WILL sing near, for grace, your God Agni, for he is good to us.
b Thou art the sitter on the waters; thou art the sitter on the hawk thou art the sitter on the vulture; thou
7. This gold and bdellium, this balsam, and Bhaga (fortune), too; these have prepared thee for husbands, that
messenger we choose.' Then the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated. The man for whom, knowing
becomes possessed of a home, and things go in order for him. The others he puts down in pairs, but four
7. With a hundred snares, O Varuna, surround him, let the liar not go free from thee, O thou that observest men!
5 Rich in adornment, rich in drops, munificent, bright in their aspect, yielding bounties that endure,
8 O Pusan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy chariot-pole.
Increasing ever more and ever more his wealth, he makes the pious dwell within unbroken bounds.
11. He makes us kin with Gods, he joins the Sun, for seeing, with mine eye;
drink after men in order of descent, beginning at the further end.
4 They, verily, were also human beings whom thou wast wont to hear, those earlier sages.
recourse to Indra with the Maruts with his own share; verily he subdues his relatives to him; he becomes
Found in three places, like the Speeder's footstep, come to present men's riches as oblations!
limbs. 'They of him, streaming with milk' [2], he says; therefore there is sap in every joint; 'the dappled
Aloft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth: Agni, thou speedest to the Gods as envoy.
All the gods who purified themselves for the sacrifice waxed great. He who knowing thus purifies
When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have rattled, like a fond girl I seek the place of meeting.
Which as a magic energy seeking waters spreads even to theimmeasurable middle region's cloud?
3 With stones they press the Soma forth, the Strong conducted by the strong:
28 These are thy generations of celestial seed thou art the Sovran Lord of all the world of life.
8 When, Holy Agni, the divine assembly, the sacred synod mid the Gods, is gathered,
the origin of cold and fever heat. Him who knows thus the origin of cold and fever heat [3] neither cold
4 Washed by the men, stone-pressed, dear on the holy grass, faithful to seasons, Lord of cattle from of
10. From thy misty road that cannot be withstood, O death, from this path (of thine) we guard this (man), and
regional (bricks), he put them down, they became the regions [4]. The supreme lord said to Prajapati,
4.6.92 Sukta 92 – Charm to endow a horse with swiftness
He saw this second layer, he put it down, it became the atmosphere. The sacrifice said to Prajapati,
a That I whip of yours which is rich in sweetness
2 Agni whom daily Varuna and Mitra the Gods bring thrice a day to this our worship,
never reached,Not, when in joy he fights the stayer of the rain: thou, and none else, hast made all things in order due.
1. The gold which is born from fire, the immortal, they bestowed upon the mortals. He who knows this deserves it;
And, Agni, this our sacrifice which wehave here prepared, to thee.
He who, most widely known and famed for happiness, invitetb them.
Horseless, yet even through the waste swift-moving, whom no shout can stay,
splendour. The one with a black neck is for Agni; verily he drives away the darkness from him: it is
Asuras with the mark undermost [3]; if he desire of a man, 'May he become richer', he should put it
gods the little blood they drew the Raksases smothered by the nights and dawn dawned on them
36. The sacrifices purified by prayer lead thee forth; the bay steeds that travel upon the road carry thee: thou
6 Give riches to the sacrificer, O Most Wise, for thou art he who granteth wealth.
When Indra had slain Vrtra, his enemies threatened him. He saw this enemy-dispelling (oblation) to be
2 When, Thunderer! I move along tremulous like a wind-blown skin,
Thou rulest as a King o'er widely-famous strength: be good to us, for thou art great.
To him, accepter of the prayer, the Atris raise their songs on high, the Atris beautify their songs.
1. Thy foremost protection, O Arundhatî, do thou bestow upon steer and milch-kine, upon (cattle of) the age when
4.2.14 Sukta 14 – Charm against a variety of female Demons, conceived as hostile to Men,
'Do thou make me go to the world of light', he says; verily she makes him go to the world of light. 'Do
4 We who add strength to thine own splendid vigour, laying within thine arms the splendid thunderWith us mayst thou, O Indra, waxen splendid, with Surya overcome the Dasa races.
13 Guard us, O Agni, from the hated demon, guard us from malice of the churlish sinner:
Blest, Indra, is thy favour dropping fatness: thy worship, Much-invoked! brings gifts in thousands.
Ye lightnings with your golden wheels, men find not your abiding-place. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Sky!
26 Best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise mid beauteous ones,
Let not the wood ten times up-piled consume me, when fixed for you it bites the ground it stands on.
twice again, 'For the season'; verily the sacrificer makes himself a ladder and bridge to attain the world
e With Hail! to you, O gods, have we made this seat,
they performed the Agnihotra as the vow; therefore one should perform the vow twice, for twice they
20 Ye bore away at night by easy pathways Jahusa compassed round on every quarter,
The soul is divine, then how does it savor the objects of the senses? With the help of the mind and the senses, it can enjoy taste, smell, touch, feel or hear sounds. Even though the mind and senses are lifeless, due to the consciousness of the soul they become lifelike. This helps them to experience pleasure and pain from their thoughts, situations, persons, and objects of the senses. Then the embodied soul identifies the same experiences of the mind and the senses as its own because of the ego.The trouble here is, that the happiness experienced through the mind and the senses is material, but the soul is divine. Hence, regardless of the amount, the soul can never be satisfied with such material pleasures. It is restless and continuously keeps searching for that ultimate source of happiness.Ralph Waldo Emerson an American philosopher very beautifully said, “We grant that human life is mean. But how did we find out that it is mean? What is the ground of this uneasiness, of this old discontent? What is this universal sense of want and ignorance, but the fine innuendo by which the soul makes its enormous claim?” Another famous philosopher, Meister Eckhart has written: “There is something in the soul which is above the living being, divine and simple. This light is only satisfied with the supra essential essence.”The divine bliss, which is both eternal and infinite; that the uncontended soul is continuously searching for; can only be attained from God. Those who realize that the mind and the senses are the cause of bondage, and the only way to break free is to turn these instruments of senses towards God, progresses on the path of devotion. Saint Tulsidas, the author of Ramayana in Hindi (Awadhi) is an excellent example.As a young lad, he was madly in love with his wife. Once she went for a few days to her parents’ house, which was in a nearby village across a stream. At night, the weather was bad, but Tulsidas was very restless and eager to meet her. He decided to go and meet her right away. It was very dark and raining, so no boatman was willing to take him across the stream. Then he saw something floating nearby, thinking that it was a log, he clung to it and swam across. When he reached her house, it was late, he was hesitant to wake the entire household. His wife’s room was on the second floor, he thought of calling out to her, but saw a rope hanging from her window. He caught that and went up to her room.She was astonished to see him there and enquired how he managed to come that late at night, in such terrible weather. He pointed at the window, but when they looked out of the window, both were shocked. There was no rope it was a snake, and what Tulsidas assumed to be a log, was in fact, a floating dead body. His desire for his wife was so intense that it had blinded his mind. She was furious and said to him, “You desire me, a body made of flesh and blood. If you would have such an intense desire for God, you would attain him and be free from the cycle of life and death.”Her words had a life-changing effect on Tulsidas. He left home, renounced a householders’ life and took up devotion. By detaching himself from the material pleasures and engaging them towards devotion to God, he went on to become a great saint and poet.He later wrote:kāmihi nāri piāri jimi lobhihi priya jimi dāma,timi raghunātha nirantara priya lāgahu mohi rāma(Ramayan)“As a lustful man desires a beautiful woman, and as an avaricious person desires wealth, may my mind and senses constantly desire Lord Ram.”
the sacrifice, the year, the lord of the sacrifice make (me) bright.
4 Ye raise up for the folk an active ruler whom, Holy Ones! a Master's hand hath fashioned.
25. From every limb make the poison start; shut it out from the heart! Now the force that is in thy poison shall go
distinction from the evil enemy. The three days are Jyotis, Go, and Ayus. The Jyotis is this (earth), the
one world after another of men. They first use the Jagati, and the metres descend from the Jagati, the
32. The amulet upon which the gods, the Fathers, and men ever live, shall ascend upon my head unto excellence!
Most liberal Giver thou, do thou inspire our song of praise, that we may win the spoil.
'This is thy Tristubh, Jagati, part', say for me to Soma.
5 When thou wast born supremest at a distance, bearing a name renowned in far-off regions,
vital airs of the gods; they found them at the distance of an arm; therefore they are dug an arm's length
Varuna's will the Gods obey and follow. I am the King of men's most lofty cover.
10. Flow, pressed, into the filter, speed the heavenly one who winneth wealth, who bringeth booty
consecrated man, and he is concealed as it were from him, when he goes (out), and the Raksases are able
16 Release me from the curse's plague and woe that comes from Varuna;
h By that (path) by which, O Agni, the priests, busy,
2 Then Agni was his name, most active to bestow, gathering up the trees with his consuming tooth;
Yet torturing cares consume me as the wolf assails the thirsty deer. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and
pressed, for once he prospered thereby. He draws with the mind, for Prajapati is mind as it were; (verily
12. We render obeisance to him (the builder); obeisance to the giver, the lord of the house; obeisance to Agni who
with the Gayatri; with Tristubh verses for a Rajanya, for the Rajanya is connected with the Tristubh; if
8 May thine inviolable car, wherewith thou guardest those who give,
for guardianship; and moreover this is just as if one should say, 'Guard that for me' [2].
Arjun addresses Shree Krishna as “Keshi-nisudan,” meaning “killer of the Keshi demon.” In his divine pastimes on the earth, Lord Krishna had killed a furious and violent demon called Keshi, who had taken the form of a mad horse and created havoc in the land of Braj. Doubt is also like an untamed horse that runs wild in the mind and destroys the garden of devotion. Arjun indicates, “Just as you slayed the Keshi demon, please slay the demon of doubt in my mind.” His question is penetrating and poignant. He wishes to know the nature of sanyās, which means “renunciation of actions.” He also wishes to know the nature of tyāg, which means “renunciation of desires for enjoying the fruits of actions.” Further, he uses the word pṛithak, meaning difference; he wishes to understand the distinction between the two terms. Arjun also refers to Shree Krishna as Hrishikesh, meaning “master of the senses.” Arjun’s goal is to accomplish the greatest of conquests, which is to subdue the mind and the senses. It is this conquest that can bestow the state of perfect peace. And the Supreme Lord Shree Krishna, as the Master of the senses, himself embodies this state of perfection.This topic had been explained in the previous chapters as well. Shree Krishna had talked about sanyās in verses 5.13 and 9.28, and about tyāg in verses 4.20 and 12.11, but he explains it here from another angle. The same truth permits itself to be presented from a variety of perspectives and each perspective provides its own unique appeal. For example, various sections of a garden leave differing impressions on the viewer’s mind, while the entire garden creates yet another impression. The Bhagavad Gita is very much like this. Each chapter is designated as a particular Yog, while the eighteenth chapter is considered the synopsis. In this chapter, Shree Krishna briefly summarizes the perennial principles and eternal truths that were presented in the previous seventeen chapters and establishes the collective conclusion of all of them. After discussing the topics of renunciation and detachment, he goes on to explain the natures of the three guṇas and how they affect people’s natural propensities for work. He reiterates that the mode of goodness is the only mode worthy of cultivation. He then concludes that bhakti, or exclusive loving devotion to the Supreme Lord is the paramount duty, and its attainment is the goal of human life.
3 The teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers, within his home, O Viyu, to direct him,
3 For, Ever-Youthful One, with thee, best Furtherer, as our ally,
7 Like as the wind on every side ruffles a pool of lotuses,
This Veda contains at least 20 Kandhas (Chapters) with each containing anywhere from a few to
Wealth-giver, furtherer with troops of heroes, sparing the brave, come, Soma, to our houses.
three Trayastrinças behind; in the middle there are the Prsthas. The Trayastrinças are the breast, the
For in thee Bounteous One, in thee the Sovran, Agni, are many boons for him who serves thee.
with Rc verses addressed to Visnu. The sacrifice is Visnu; verily he drives away the Raksases from the
6 Thou for Agastya's sister's sons yokest thy pair of ruddy steeds.
4. These Kanvas, the effacers of life, drive into the mountain; go thou burning after them like fire, O goddess
Or in a mansion that is built above the sea, come thence, ye Asvins, hitherward.
for the winning of food; verily also they are propagated by it. The Bhadra (Saman) has the Ekavinça
2 Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come to him as dames to an assembly.
the Maruts are food, embryos are food, the twenty-fivefold is food; verily be places food on the south;
Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of Heaven.
ghee, ghee is brilliance, sight is brilliance; verily by brilliance he wins for him brilliance and sight. His
1. God Said, “I want you to be of one heart and one mind, devoid of hate. Love one another as the cow loves her
He, most heroic, hath his home with splendour, with glory and with riches and with valour.
8 Sarasvati who perfects our devotion, Ila divine, Bharati all surpassing,Three Goddesses, with power inherent, seated, protect this holy Grass, our flawless refuge!
says, for he is the bowl from which the gods drink. 'O Agni, like a felly the spokes, thou dost surround
True, he revealed to you, O WonderWorkers, sweet Soma, Tvastar's secret, as your girdle.
3 Coming together to their common youngling both Cows, fairshaped, spread forth in all directions,
bearing; Pusan in the cow for the purchase of the Soma; Varuna when bound (in the cloth); Asura in the
7 With thy fierce bolt, O God invoked of many, drive to a distance from afar the foeman.
5 These men have led about the cow, have duly carried Agni round,
Having said that no one can know him, Shree Krishna now states that some people do know him. Is he contradicting himself? No, he means that by self-efforts no one can know God, but if God himself bestows his grace upon someone, that fortunate soul gets to know him. Hence, all those who come to know God do so by virtue of his divine grace. As he mentions in verse 10 of this chapter: “To those whose minds are always united with me in loving devotion, I give the divine knowledge by which they can attain me.” Here, Shree Krishna says that those who know him as the Supreme Lord of all lords are not deluded. Such blessed souls become free from all reactions to their past and present actions, and develop loving devotion toward him.To make the distinction between the souls and himself, Shree Krishna declares that he is loka maheśhwaram (the great Lord of all the abodes of existence). The same declaration has been made in the Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad:tamīśhwarāṇāṁ paramaṁ maheśhwaraṁtaṁ devatānāṁ paramaṁ cha daivataṁpatiṁ patīnāṁ paramaṁ parastādvidāma devaṁ bhuvaneśhamīḍyam(6.7)[v3]“The Supreme Lord is the Controller of all controllers; he is the God of all gods. He is the Beloved of all beloveds; he is the Ruler of the world, and beyond the material energy.”
c For a prop, a support, of the five winds I take thee.
I Indra Maghavan, excite the conflict; I stir the dust, Lord of surpassing vigour.
Gavatri hath, they say, three brands for kindling: hence it excels in majesty and vigour.
2 I praise that Indra, known to all men, honoured with songs, extolled with hymns at sacrifices,
6 Make all of these grow crops of hair, you cultivated field of ours,
9 He with his left hand checketh even the mighty, and with his righthand gathereth up the booty.
21 At the Trikadrukas the Gods span sacrifice that stirs the mind:
puts the bundle over the sacrificial strew, the strew is offspring, the bundle the sacrificer; verily he
3 For even the blessed longing that is in thee would bring the Gods down to the singer's worship,
last, the last, the offspring of being, being, the overlord (prosper with the sacrifice).
more humbly than even a bad man [2]. In that he mixes (the cup) for (Tvastr) with the wives with ghee,
Brhaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, the dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning.
Is rich in food, drawn by red steeds, and holy: by day and night to him shall all be pleasant.
2 Stay still, O Maghavan, advance no farther. a draught of well-pressed Soma will I give thee.
him; having crept to the seat he should look along the south side (saying), 'Come, O ye fathers; through
4 He, at his birth, whose path is black behind him, filled heaven and earth with far-apparent splendour:
4.11.1 Sukta 1 – The preparation of the Brahmaudana, the porridge given as a fee to the
and female, the two-and-a-half-year-old male and female, the three-year-old male and female, the fouryear-old male and female, the draught ox and the draught cow, the bull and the cow that is barren, the
Asvins, each day yours is the Adhvaryu's duty: Brahman and wood are here: 'tis yours to offer.
3 Whatever dwellings ye possess, O Asvins, in fields of men or in the streams of heaven,
The quail from her great misery ye delivered, and a new leg for Vispala provided.
Beautiful be thy union with the body, beloved in the Gods' sublimest birthplace!
it cannot be untied, for the production of offspring. The cow with which the Soma is bought is speech.
Thou, lengthening our princes' life and high renown, flowest for Indra as his might to gladdening drink.
with these do thou enter into us, and elsewhere send the evil thoughts!
3 Unharmed is Pusan's chariot wheel; the box ne'er falleth to the ground,
Heaven and Earth, Vasu! shook at the choosing of the Priest: the burthen thou didst bear, didst worship
3 Mid all his host, he bindeth on the quiver he driveth cattle from what foe he pleaseth:
these worlds are barren for him, the people are barren; verily also he who is long in exile has recourse to
5 O Varuna, whatever the offence may be which we as men commit against the heavenly host,
As such will we exalt you, Lords of splendour, now, O Asvins, with our prayer and praise.
Whose conquering wealth is never checked, is never checked in deeds of might.
Be friendly to its in thy spirit, Manyu, O Much-invoked, in shock of mighty battle.
11 Now, lauded for thine aid, Heroic Indra, sped by our prayer, wax mighty in thy body.
a O God Savitr, he hath declared that to thee; that do thou impel and offer.
Prepare the implements, make all things ready, and let the sacrifice, my friends, go forward.
43 Harness, O Agni, O thou God, thy steeds which are most excellent:
20 The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in length they spread!
1. WITH thine assistance, O thou Mighty Indra, be it the least, the midmost, or the highest,Great with those aids and by these powers support us, Strong God! in battle that subdues our foemen.
Bearing our prayers, die sky's ridge have they mounted, and in a moment speed round earth and
impregnated in front from behind; verily from behind he deposits seed for him in front. Five he puts
1. HERE is the gear for friction, here tinder made ready for the spark.
Who spring from Manu, those who know fair rites, who pour their blessings down.
4 Waters from sacrifice came to the Gandharva Visvavasu, O Soma, when they saw him.
6 Rebha ye saved from tyranny; for Atri's sake ye quenched with cold the fiery pit that compassed him.
12 Vaisvanara, as of old, mounted the cope of heaven, heaven's ridge, well greeted, by those skilled in
6 All this I did. The Gods' own conquering power never impedeth me whom none opposeth.
6. When, even as she were present here, red Dawn hath shone from far away,
Repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacrificer peace and cornfort!
3 The heaven with streams of golden hue, earth with her tints of green and goldThe golden Pair yield Indra plenteous nourishment: between them moves the golden One.
He grasped his thunderbolt to slay the Dragon, and loosed, that they might flow, the youthful Waters.
1. Come hither, Indra, with thy Bays, come thou to Kanva's eulogy.
11 O Vrtra-slayer, thou and I will both combine for winning spoil.
15 May thy truth, Indra, Wondrous Hero be my guard: bear me o'er much woe, Thunderer! as over
2 Varuna cut the channels for thy forward course, O Sindhu, when thou rannest on to win the race.
Thyself alone the universe's Sovran: so send forth men to combat and to rest them.
kinsmen all, of one mind, to the glory of this mighty guardian!
measures, there would be enough for the sacrificer only, and not also for the priests in the Sadas. With
2 Thus be ye lauded, ye destroyers of the foe, ye Three-and-Thirty Deities,
3. Auspicious be to (our) men, auspicious to (our) cows and horses, auspicious to this entire field, auspicious be
4 Indra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on the wicked fiend from heaven and from the
that direction. Again he lets them loose to this quarter, the breath is yonder sun: verily he lets them loose
We pray to him who dwelleth near, Guard of the Field, to all Immortal Gods who never are remiss.
If he did not so specify them, he would put the gifts out of correspondence with the deities, and would
Who is the god whom we are to worship with oblation?
that protects the body, furnishes threefold defence, in order to (secure) strength!
The desire to attain success is natural to the jīva. It comes from being a part of God, who is all-perfect, and hence the soul too wishes to be perfect and successful like its source—God. Success can be attained in two realms—material and spiritual. Those who consider the world to be a source of happiness strive for material advancement. And those who consider spiritual wealth to be the real treasure worthy of possessing, strive for it by rejecting material endeavors. However, if such spiritualists fail in their attempt, they are apparently left with neither spiritual nor material assets. Thinking in this manner, Arjun asks whether their position is like that of a broken cloud. A cloud, which breaks away from the group of clouds, becomes worthless. It neither offers sufficient shade, nor does it increase its weight and become rain-bearing. It merely blows in the wind and perishes like a non-entity in the sky. Arjun asks whether the unsuccessful yogi suffers a similar fate, with no position in any sphere.
22 Enjoy the offering: beam thou strength upon us; combine thou for our good all kinds of glory.
who practises witchcraft they practise then against; he should double each of the Puronuvakyas, for
Like one who slumbered in destruction's bosom, or like the Sun when dwelling in the darkness.
He gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and decks their bodies for success in battle.
2 For over thee, O Friend from birih, the wrath of man hath no control:
16 Blazing with splendour, Agni, God, through pious gifts of sacred oil,
2. Thou didst destroy the Dragon: thou sentest the rivers down to Earth.
17 Upward, O Agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplendent, blazing high,
Thus to this Agni have the Immortals spoken. To man who spreads the grass may he grant shelter,
grasped them the mule escaped. Following it he took its seed, and placed it in the ass. Therefore the ass
concluding oblation in the scrapings of the opening oblation; this is the course of the sacrifice. Now if he
He, when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy oil, the offered fatness, longeth for it with his glow.
(The Soma) which for thee, O lord of bays, the stone
43 The Kanvas with their hymns of praise have magnified this ancient thought
11. From the rain of Parganya we have risen up, immortal. I free thee from all evil and disease, (and) unite thee
a speaker of speech, and men call him 'lord of speech'. The four-night rite is incomplete; the six-night
Food is cattle, he takes it himself; verily by himself he fills his desires of cattle, for no one else can grant
Ye are the Queens of independent riches Sarasvati give full life to the singer!
The cup for Indra and Vayu is speech; in that the cups are drawn beginning with that to Indra and Vayu,
17 Here the arranging priests, as did Atharvan, rub this Agni forth,
8 O Indra, Heaven and Earth augment thy manly power and thy renown;
Inferior to us shall be our rivals! Cause him to ascend to the highest heaven!
verily with that be makes the sacrificer to grow great. 'O Agni, bring Agni hither, bring Soma hither', he
6 Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highest conquering might is thine, Subduer!
its name. In that the Upaçaya lies near (upaçáye) on the south, (it serves) to drive away the foe. All the
recourse to Prajapati; for him he offered this (offering) of the after-shoots of rice to Indra on eleven
(indriyéna) he surrounds his fellows on both sides. The sacrificial fee is a garment with a fringe, for the
4 Who of you knows this secret One? The Infant by his own nature hath brought forth his Mothers.
And these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, come forth and show themselves, and none are
ford did they place (consecration and penance); he bathes at a ford [2]; verily he becomes a ford for his
break the uniformity the Agnistoma Samans are before and after (the greater Stoma). There is an
the Naksatra, the Açvins the deity; the Apabharanis the Naksatra, Yama the deity.
9 The chief and best of these abideth in the sea, nor doth libation fail wherein it is prolonged.
4 Our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to the wells.
As they devour the branch of the Red-coloured Tree, these, the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered
Even from far away come thou unto our feast, or listen it already here!
2. Great in thou power and wisdom, strong, with thought that comprehendeth all!
10 Yoked to his chariot-pole there stood the Coursers: they only travel round earth's farthest limits.
They leave one far behind through their attainments, and some who count as Brahmans wander
r Ye have made Indra win the prize, O trees; now be ye loosed.
3. Lift from us, O Varuna, the uppermost fetter, take down the nethermost, loosen the middlemost! Then shall we,
Shree Krishna uses the words yāvat kiñchit, meaning “whatsoever form of life that exists,” regardless of how enormous or infinitesimal it may be, is all born of the union of the kṣhetrajña (knower of the field) and the kṣhetra (field of activities). The Abrahamic traditions accept the existence of the soul in humans, but do not accept that other forms of life also have souls. This concept condones violence toward the other life forms. However, the Vedic philosophy stresses that wherever consciousness exists, there must be the presence of the soul. Without it, there can be no consciousness.In the early twentieth century, Sir J.C. Bose established through experiments that even plants, which are non-moving life forms, can feel and respond to emotions. His experiments proved that soothing music can enhance the growth of plants. When a hunter shoots a bird sitting on a tree, the vibrations of the tree seem to indicate that it weeps for the bird. And when a loving gardener enters the garden, the trees feel joyous. The changes in the vibrations of the tree reveal that it also possesses consciousness and can experience semblances of emotions. These observations corroborate Shree Krishna’s statement here that all life forms possess consciousness; they are the combination of the eternal soul, which is the source of consciousness, and the body, which is made of the insentient material energy.
praised with twenty-five, wild cattle were created, Vayu was the overlord. They praised with twentyseven, sky and earth [2] went apart, the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas followed their example, theirs was
2.1.7.5 Mantra 5: The Explanation of the Filling of the Dhruva
25 Wax miglity, thou whom many laud for aids which Rsis have extolled.
In the udder of the sun maiden, in the lap of Aditi,
10. Take into thy hands, O man, the press-stones that work together: the gods that are to be revered have come
8. The apâmârga is sole ruler over all plants, with it do we wipe mishap from thee: do thou then live exempt from
4 That Agni, wise High-Priest, in every house takes thought for sacrifice and holy service, yea, takes
4 Come with thy girthed mares, with abundant vigour and plenteous strength to him who sings thy
Decked with bright colour he dispels the darkness, like Ausija, with clear flame swifily flying.
4 And ye show wMom, Wondrous Gods with fulness of intellIgence.
serves) to make firm the quarters; again, the metres are cattle; verily he makes cattle available for him.
People who are situated in sāttvic renunciation are not miserable in disagreeable circumstances; nor do they get attached to situations that are agreeable to them. They simply do their duty under all conditions, without feeling elated when the going is good or feeling dejected when life becomes tough. They are not like a dry leaf that is tossed hither and tither by every passing breeze. Instead, they are like the reeds in the sea, gently negotiating every rising and falling wave. While retaining their equanimity and without succumbing to anger, greed, envy, or attachment, they watch the waves of events rising and falling around them. Bal Gangadhar Tilak was a scholar of the Bhagavad Gita and a famous karm yogi. Before Mahatma Gandhi came on the scene, he was at the forefront of the freedom struggle of India. He was asked what position he would choose if India became independent—Prime Minister or Foreign Minister? He replied, “My ambition was to write a book on Differential Calculus. I will fulfill it.” Once, the police arrested him for creating unrest. He asked his friend to find out the provisions under which he was arrested, and to inform him in prison. When the friend reached him after an hour, he was fast asleep in the jail. Another time, he was working in his office, and his clerk brought him the news that his elder son was seriously ill. Instead of getting emotionally wrought, he asked the clerk to get a doctor, and he continued working. Half an hour later, his friend came and conveyed the same news. He said, “I have called for the doctor to see him. What else can I do?” These instances reveal how he retained his composure despite being in the midst of tumultuous situations. He was able to continue performing his actions because of the internal emotional composure; had he been emotionally distressed he would have been unable to sleep in the jail cell or concentrate on his work at the office.
verily on the north he places might; therefore he that advances to the north is victorious. They make up
Strengthen therewith the Arya's hate and Dasa's, and let the arms of Nahusas be mighty.
l O Rudra, that highest active name of thee, to that thou art offered, thou art offered to Yama.
1. UPRISEN is Savitar, this God, to quicken, Priest who neglects not this most constant duty.
Agni produces cattle for him, Indra makes them grow up. These are curds, honey, ghee, waters, and
to the man who has sacrificed. In that he offers these libations, he places in himself power and fame.
1. YONDER goes up that light: your chariot is yoked that travels round upon the summit of this heaven.
16 Sasarpari brought glory speedily to these, over the generations of the Fivefold Race;
With song I seek the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, Gods for help much to be desired.
6 So have I glorified with praise strong Dadhikravan, conquering Steed.
20 Aid us, O Heroes, for those hymns for which ye helped GoSarya erst,
3 Come unto us, ye swift to listen: as at home upon the sacred grass sit and enjoy yourselves.
f Thou art the strength of the Angirases, soft as wool; grant me strength, guard me, harm me not.
ruin. He puts (them) above the 'sitters on the vault'; that is as when having taken a wife one seats her in
Dawn on her nobly-harnessed car, the Goddess, awaking men to happiness, approacheth.
5. To Indra in the firmament this mighty tawny Steer hath flowed
14 When in their terror all the Gods shrank from the Dragon's furious might,
The gods were afraid of the warrior on his birth. While still within (the womb) they fettered him with a
Bring us, Lord of Bay Steeds, to make us joyful, celestial wealth, abundant, undecaying.
Never be thief or sinful man your matter, and may the dart of Rudra still avoid you.
m Thou art a piler round; in the manner of Angiras be firm with that deity.
6. Superior art thou, inferior are thy rivals, and whatsoever adversaries are thine, O king! Sole ruler, befriended of
rest upon the sacrifice [2] or on the lord of the sacrifice? He replied, 'On the lord of the sacrifice.' 'But in
only; spotted is the thousand on the other side.' The one for a boon [5] should be beautiful, perfect in
2. Favour this (plan), Anumati; fit it tooether, Âkûti! Ye gods, send forth the yearning love may yonder man burn
4 As the great World-halves, so are their Son's praises; skilled, as a man, to act, is he the Herald.
bestows light; full of light these worlds become for him; he makes them of like strength. Bamba and
You, Asvins, Lords of solemn rites, with calls entreating you to come.
Effortless they pass on to perfect this and that, appointed works which Brahmanaspati ordained.
24. The gods did beg the sterile cow of him wilh whom she was born at first. That very one Nârada recognised
injures not the animals of the village, nor those of the wild. Or rather should it be put down; in that he
2 Bhrgus who served him in the home of waters set him of old in houses of the living.
22 Once, only once, the heaven was made, once only once, the earth was formedOnce, only Prsni's milk was shed: no second, after this, is born.
the Stomas from the beginning [1]. The Stomas being sung together make up the Viraj, and two verses
3 Effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the Troop,
Indra, and Visnu, Pusan, Brahmanaspati, Adityas, Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Light.
5. Whether thou art beyond the haunts of men, or whether across the river, this very herb, as if a captive bound,
Long have they been inflated with presumption: slay them, and bring us hither their possessions.
down the breath-supporters he puts down the rain-winners, therefore the rain starts from the sky,
yourselves, (ye Brahmans), in sheltering garments: (even) the face of the porridge is a homespun garment!
1. This Sage, exalted by our lands, flows to the purifying sieve,
8 With utmost speed, in restless haste at sunset Varuna seeks his watery habitation.
9 Move far from me what sins I have committed: let me not suffer, King, for guilt of others.
The Gods have come that they may taste the oblation of him who mounted, first of all, the Courser.
4 Thou art a Steer by lustre: we, O Pavamana, faithfully
Let no oppression master this our holy work: may we, O Indu, gain all opulence through thee.
May India, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who gives us peace.
For Ayu's sake I caused Veta to bend and bow, and into Savya's hand delivered Padgrbhi.
d With us be union with thee; with me let thy wealth abide.
incisors on one side only that of cattle, having sheep-like hooves that of sheep, the goat-nature that of
o O Agni, whatever to-day, O offering Hotr of the people,
sacrifice of him who knows thus is in order at the beginning. If a man sacrifices after announcing the
9 Now loudly let the viol sound, the lute send out its voice with might,
a May I be harm us not who is father of earth
Who gleams refulgent with his lovely lustre: the kine have waked to meet him when enkindled.
That Indra still may linger at our worship, as one led swift to work, to hear our praises.
2 Most frequent guests, they scorn not what is ready: even now the lauded Asvins are beside us.
north he let them loose; this is the auspicious quarter of gods and men (3); verily he lets them loose in
No wild-bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who ever seeks him who hath pressed the Soma,
6 In two ways have the sons established in his place the Asura who finds the light, by the third act,
6 That mortal, ever unsubdued, gains wealth and every precious thing,
k Thou art the forehead of Visnu; thou art the back of Visvu.
13 May Aja-Ekapad, the God, be gracious, gracious the Dragon of the Deep, and Ocean.
Indra, who made these worlds, the Strong, the ty, who never groweth old, the victory-giver.
2. Men, Vasu! by the Soma with lauds call thee to the foremost place.
'I gaze on offspring', he says; verily he wins all the domesticated animals. 'Ye are water; may I share
Therefore upon the earth do we invoke thee, where heroes win, for sons and kine and waters.
3. Thou art, O salve, both a protection that crushes the sorcerers, and thou hast knowledge of immortality
d From the ocean, O Maruts, ye make (the rain) to start,
1 In the great synod will I laud thy two Bay Steeds: I prize the sweet strong drink of thee the WarriorGod,
As Friend of men he decks the wife and husband: as for the race, Brhaspati, nerve our coursers.
gods, as Manu among men, becomes he who knowing thus sacrifices with this sacrifice. The
Soma, shed in the press, thou stolest and didst drink, and hence hast won surpassing might.
2 He bellows with a roar arourd the highest twigs: the Tawny One is sweetened as he breaks them up.
the king', that (saying) is the origin of the 'king's evil'; in that he became worse, that is (the origin) of the
and full moon (sacrifices). The theologians say, 'He indeed would begin the new and full moon
6 She, verily, exceeding vast to look on debarreth from her light nor kin nor stranger.
May the four regions bend and bow before me: with thee for guardian may we win in combat.
3 Agni, envoy, I place in front; the oblation-bearer I address:
Their battle-cry thou madest sound victorious in the shocks of war.
comes, to all of them hospitality is offered; the metres are the retinue of King Soma. 'Thou art the
2 Let Indra drink, O Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, and all Deities for strength.
bricks; the ghee is the home dear to Agni; verily he unites him with his dear home [3], and also with
3. Thou that causest affection, kindlest (love), brown, lovely (plant), draw (us) together; draw together yonder
8 Hirn Wise and Strong they glorify, the foremost Champion in the fray,
Man's helper from of old, not disappointing hope, Friend of our friends, to thee ,as such we sing this
20 May the kind excellence of him the Kind, loud Roarers! be our guide,
Send up our offerings when we call upon you, and so among the Gods obtain us treasures.
Sajaniya hymn; one should recite the Vihavya hymn; one should recite the Kayaçubhiya hymn of
They who beheld the Friend beside the living were cast aside by thee as they rode onward.
and Agni are the supporters of force among the gods; verily he piles it with force in the atmosphere, for
hemispheres of the world! The all-possessing Maruts shall engage thee: bring hither that (king) who devoutly
down and he who [3] knows them thus. Agni is pain; he afflicts the Adhvaryu, the sacrificer, and
the Brahman class as first; verily the sacrificer creates offspring with the Brahman as first; 'the holy
24 Haters of those who serve you not, bliss-bringers, bring us bliss with those auspicious aids
Show thyself strong, O Axle, fixed and strengthened: throw us not from the car whereon we travel.
6 Worshipping even as they list, singers laud him who findeth wealth,
Who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres, sportive and piercing even to the summit.
May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may the Missile borne on wings avoid us.
Raksases attack the sacrifice; in that he sets down full vessels the part of the sacrifice being performed is
the lowest darkness, who hateth us and whom we hate', he says; there are two (kinds of) persons, he
a Thou hast come into being by the toil; the work of the gods thou art the way of holy order. With the
6 One of you Mitarisvan brought from heaven, the Falcon rent the other from the mountain.
3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, Indra? Speed through our doors to songs, for
p Homage to you, makers of arrows, and to you, makers of bows, homage!
with him with eyes on all sides they went to the world of heaven. In that he puts down four naturally
Production of offspring is light. Agni is the light of the gods; the Viraj is the light of the metres. The
Of all the riches in the hills, the waters, the herbs, among mankind, thou art the Sovran.
9 To thee speeds forth my hope that craves the gift of corn, and kine and gold,
He in his strength, with all-surpassing prowess, through wondrous arts crushed the malignant Dasyus.
4 Looking on men, ne'er slumbering, they by their deserts attained as Gods to lofty immortality.
i May the cry of Indra guard thee in front with the Vasus; may the swift of mind guard thee on the right
1. BEDEWED with holy oil and meetly worshipped, the Swift One vies with Surya's beam in splendour.
1. O Purifying Soma, bring to us the wondrous treasure, meet.
they caused him to be seized by Varuna and by Visnu, the sacrifice, they drove him away; his power
I was a worthy King to rule the worshipper, when I gave Tuji dear inviolable gifts.
forms of animals; its hairs are [2] the form of man, its lack of horns that of horses, the possession of one
Friend, Much-invoked! art thou with thy dear Rbhus: fashion ye this our hymn for our advantage.
Here, Arjun is referred to as “the crowned one.” He had once helped Indra kill two demons. As a token of his pleasure, Indra had placed a dazzling crown on his head. In this verse, Sanjay refers to the crown on Arjun’s head. But a crown is also the symbol of monarchy, and Sanjay deliberately uses the word to hint to the old king Dhritarasthra that his sons, the Kauravas, will lose the throne to the Pandavas in the impending war.
3. That thou mayst send us ample wealth, O Agni, we will kindler thee:
In his protection heroes rest in safety. Great is the Cods' supreme and sole dominion.
recourse to Agni and Surya with their own share; verily they bestow sight upon him; he becomes
From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were born.
ratio, for ascent. 'May one for me, three', he says; one and three are the metres of the gods [51, four and
(you are) armed with hatchets, moving like two flying (birds) with forms like the moon, attaining success
same. Those, who knowing thus perform (the rite of) thirty-three days, are distinguished from the evil
therefore a Brahman who has two names is likely to prosper. Those which came nearest gained the
piles it with the metres. The fire that is re-piled is called the descendant; he who knowing thus re-piles
26 The Vrtra-slayer drinks the juice. May he who gives a hundred aids
Continuing to explain the nature of the soul, Shree Krishna reiterates the concept of rebirth, comparing it to an everyday activity. When garments become torn and useless, we discard them in favor of new ones, but in doing so we do not change ourselves. In the same manner, the soul remains unchanged, when it discards its worn-out body and takes birth in a new body elsewhere.The Nyāya Darśhan gives the following argument to prove the existence of rebirth:jātasya harṣhabhayaśhoka sampratipatteḥ (3.1.18) [v27]It states that if you observe a little baby, you will find it sometimes becomes happy, sometimes sad, and sometimes fearful, without any apparent reason. According to the Nyāya Darśhan, the little baby is remembering its past life, and hence experiencing these emotions. However, as it grows up, the impressions of the present life are imprinted so strongly upon its mind, that they erase most past memories. Besides, the processes of death and birth are also so painful to the soul that they erase a substantial portion of the past life’s memories.The Nyāya Darśhan gives another argument in support of rebirth: stanyābhilāṣhāt (3.1.21) [v28] It says that a newborn baby has no knowledge of language. How then can a mother teach her baby to suckle her breast when she inserts it in the baby’s mouth? However, the newborn child has drunk milk in infinite past lifetimes, even in animal forms, from the breasts, teats, and udders of innumerable mothers. Hence, when the mother puts her breast in the baby’s mouth, it automatically starts suckling based on past practice.Without accepting the concept of rebirth, the disparity between human beings becomes inexplicable and irrational. For example, let us suppose one man is blind from birth. If that person asks why he was punished in this way, what logical answer can be given to him? If we say it was a result of his karmas, he may argue that the present life is the only life he has, and therefore, there are no past karmas at the time of birth that should afflict him. If we say it was the will of God, it would also seem implausible, since God is all-merciful and would not unnecessarily want anyone to be blind. The only logical explanation is that the person was born blind as a consequence of karmas from past lives. Thus, from common sense and on the authority of the scriptures we are obliged to believe in the concept of rebirth.
q By sacrifice to the gods, Agni and Soma, may I be possessed of sight.
Although Shree Krishna previously emphasized that the mind and senses are propelled by their natural tendencies, he now opens up the possibility of harnessing them. As long as we have the material body, for its maintenance, we have to utilize the objects of the senses. Shree Krishna is not asking us to stop consuming what is necessary, but to practice eradicating attachment and aversion. Definitely sanskārs (past life tendencies) do have a deep-rooted influence on all living beings, but if we practice the method taught in the Bhagavad Gita, we can succeed in correcting the situation.The senses naturally run toward the sense objects and their mutual interaction creates sensations of pleasure and pain. For example, the taste buds experience joy in contact with delicious foods and distress in contact with bitter foods. The mind repeatedly contemplates the sensations of pleasure and pain which it associates with these objects. Thoughts of pleasure in the sense objects create attachment while thoughts of pain create aversion. Shree Krishna tells Arjun to succumb neither to feelings of attachment nor aversion.In the discharge of our worldly duty, we will have to encounter all kinds of likeable and unlikeable situations. We must practice neither to yearn for the likeable situations, nor to avoid the unlikeable situations. When we stop being slaves of both the likes and dislikes of the mind and senses, we will overcome our lower nature. And when we become indifferent to both pleasure and pain in the discharge of our duty, we will become truly free to act from our higher nature.
'O Agni, thou art great', he says, for Agni is great. 'O Brahman', he says, for he is a Brahman. 'O
Whereby ye guhrd the mortal man from sore distress, and lead him safe beyond his foes.
Self-moving, brisk, unwearied, they o'erthrow the firm; the Maruts with bright lances make all things to
1. I CALL the Gods of lofty glory for our weal, the makers of the light, well-skilled in sacrifice;
rich in heroes, he shall, when implored, not abandon me, nor may I abandon thee: abundance in cattle and
as Christianity and Islam). The term 'mata' means a belief, view or opinion and HAS NOTHING TO DO
2. Flow onward with that stream of thine, whereby the cows have come to us.
7 Whene'er I gratified you here together, your grace was given us, O ye rich in booty.
All these our doings shall delight the singer. Let Nirrti depart to distant places.
6 Thou Indra, Lord of Bays, made strong by impulse, hast slain the vexers of thy friends, who give not.
5 O Surya, when the Asura's descendant Svarbhanu, pierced thee through and through with darkness,
Washed by the men, the Strong Farseeing One streams forth nutriti us food that all desire.
The word prakāśhakam means “illuminating.” The word anāmayam means “healthy and full of well-being.” By extension, it also means “of peaceful quality,” devoid of any inherent cause for pain, discomfort, or misery. The mode of goodness is serene and illuminating. Thus, sattva guṇa engenders virtue in one’s personality and illuminates the intellect with knowledge. It makes a person become calm, satisfied, charitable, compassionate, helpful, serene, and tranquil. It also nurtures good health and freedom from sickness. While the mode of goodness creates an effect of serenity and happiness, attachment to them itself binds the soul to material nature.Let us understand this through an example. A traveler was passing through a forest, when three robbers attacked him. The first said, “Let us kill him and steal all his wealth.” The second said, “No, let us not kill him. We will simply bind him, and take away his possessions.” Following the advice of the second robber, they tied him up in ropes and stole his wealth. When they had gone some distance away, the third robber returned. He opened the ropes of the traveler, and took him to the edge of the forest. He showed the way out, and said, “I cannot go out myself, but if you follow this path, you will be able to get out of the forest.”The first robber was tamo guṇa, the mode of ignorance, which literally wants to kill the soul, by degrading it into sloth, languor, and nescience. The second robber was rajo guṇa, the mode of passion, which excites the passions of the living being, and binds the soul in innumerable worldly desires. The third robber was sattva guṇa, the mode of goodness, which reduces the vices of the living being, eases the material discomfort and puts the soul on the path of virtue. Yet, even sattva guṇa is within the realm of material nature. We must not get attached to it; instead, we must use it to step up to the transcendental platform.Beyond these three, is śhuddha sattva, the transcendental mode of goodness. It is the mode of the divine energy of God that is beyond material nature. When the soul becomes God-realized, by his grace, God bestows śhuddha sattva upon the soul, making the senses, mind, and intellect divine.
the Viraj as food. 'It must be piled with the seasons, the metres, the Stomas, and the Prsthas', they say. In
in that he anoints it with ghee after it has been piled, thereby is it purified, made worthy of sacrifice and
8 Our chants of praise have strengthened thee, O Satakratu, and our lauds
As soon as born he overcomes his foemen, be in whom all who lend him aid are joyful.
The offerer with his folk advances more and more: he fills his house with precious things.
the most appropriating of gods; he says Indra later; verily he places strength in him at the top. He offers
2. After the ancient manner I, like Kanva, beautify my songs,
5 Faring together, young, with meeting limits, Twin Sisters lying in their Parents' bosom,
27. Lord! You are within men; You are within women; You are within the young; You are within the old; You live
3 Offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice:
[1], or so much was over the fire, be sprang up alive and came into union with Agni and Soma. He grew
Their parting and their home-return, and watcheth their approach and rest.
One of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, the Other smites and slays resistless foemen.
Ye, Indra-Varuna, have in might surpassed them, and thus were ye spread wide, O Earth and Heaven.
That in their homes the wealthy chiefs and they who are your friends may thrive.
husked ones in the milk are Brhaspati's, the unhusked in the butter are Mitra's; the Vedi must be selfmade, the strew self-cut, the kindling-stick self-made; the sacrificial fee is the white (cow) with a white
8 This the sweet draught, with cows, the men, the mountains, the waters, Indra, have for thee made
Strong, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, pressed from the stone, Soma hath waxen mighty.
12 What is the care of Indra for his Mother, what cares he for the Father who begat him?
4 Indu arouses strength the Sage who strives for victory, winning power,
One seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of pleasure as a son his father.
12 To him adorable, sage, strong and mighty we have sung forth our song of praise and homage.
At Indra's singers barkest thou? Why dust thou seek to terrify us? Go to sleep.
Shree Krishna has explained the status of the jīvātmā (individual soul) within the body. Now in this verse He explains the position of the Paramātmā (Supreme Soul), who also resides within the body. He previously mentioned the Paramātmā in verse 13.3as well, when He stated that the individual soul is the knower of the individual body while the Supreme Soul is the knower of all the infinite bodies.The Supreme Soul, who is located within everyone, also manifests in the personal form as Lord Vishnu. The Supreme Lord in His form as Vishnu is responsible for maintaining this creation. He resides in the Kṣhīr Sāgar (the ocean of milk), at the top of the universe in His personal form. He also expands Himself to reside in the hearts of all living beings as the Paramātmā. Seated within, He notes their actions, keeps an account of their karmas, and bestows the results at the proper time. He accompanies the jīvātmā (individual soul) to whatever body it receives in each lifetime. He does not hesitate in residing in the body of a snake, a pig, or insect. The Muṇḍakopaniṣhad states:dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā samānaṁ vṛikṣhaṁ pariṣhasvajātetayoranyaḥ pippalaṁ svādvattya-naśhnannanyo abhichākaśhītisamāne vṛikṣhe puruṣho nimagno-’nīśhayā śhochati muhyamānaḥjuṣhtaṁ yadā paśhyatyanyamīśha-masya mahimānamiti vītaśhokaḥ (3.1.1-2)“Two birds are seated in the nest (heart) of the tree (the body) of the living form. They are the jīvātmā (individual soul) and Paramātmā (Supreme Soul). The jīvātmā has its back toward the Paramātmā, and is busy enjoying the fruits of the tree (the results of the karmas it receives while residing in the body). When a sweet fruit comes, it becomes happy; when a bitter fruit comes, it becomes sad. The Paramātmā is a friend of the jīvātmā, but He does not interfere; He simply sits and watches. If the jīvātmā can only turn around to the Paramātmā, all its miseries will come to an end.” The jīvātmā has been bestowed with free will i.e. the freedom to turn away or toward God. By the improper use of that free will the jīvātmā is in bondage, and by learning its proper usage, it can attain the eternal service of God and experience infinite bliss.
these worlds [3]. Agni had three elder brothers. They perished when carrying the offering to the gods.
This-at your glad carouse -enhanced the mighty hymn of the great sage Kaksivan. Thou art waxing
Ignorance has led the soul into its present predicament. Having forgotten its spiritual identity as a tiny fragment of God, it has fallen into material consciousness. Therefore, knowledge is vital for resurrecting itself from its present position. The Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad states exactly the same thing:sanyuktametat kṣharam akṣharaṁ chavyaktāvyaktaṁ bharate viśhwam īśhaḥanīśhaśh chātmā badhyate bhoktṛibhāvā-jjñātvā devaṁ muchyate sarvapāśhaiḥ (1.8)“There are three entities in creation—the ever-changing material nature, the unchangeable souls, and the Master of both, who is the Supreme Lord. Ignorance of these entities is the cause of bondage of the soul, while knowledge of them helps it cut asunder the fetters of Maya.”The knowledge that Shree Krishna is talking about is not just bookish information, but realized wisdom. Realization of knowledge is achieved when we first acquire theoretical knowledge of the three entities from the Guru and the scriptures, and then engage accordingly in spiritual practice. Shree Krishna now talks about some of these spiritual practices in the next verse.
3 To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to thee, the Bull, O thou whom Bay Steeds carry.
cow is the sap of the metres, the rain indeed is as it were sap; verily by the sap of the metres [3] he wins
The scorpion's venom hath no strength Scorpion, thy venom is but weak.
7. Effused, the God flows onward with his stream to Indra, to the God,
I. At the Trikadrukas the Great and Strong hath drunk drink blent with meal. With Visnu hath he quaffed
Prolong our days of life, wipe out our trespasses; destroy our foes, be our companions and our Friends.
10 Help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, this eulogy to Rudra, him
10 With reverence they drain the fount that circles with its wheel above,
1. THESE first, the boundless Sea, and Matarisvan, fierce-glowing Fire, the Strong, the Bliss-bestower.
The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. Thou hast waxed mighty over all.
2 These hymns brought forth for thee, O Agni, laud thee for bounteous gifts, with cattle and with horses.
8 Making the light that shines from heaven thou flowest on to every form
2. Wherewith thou foundest shining lights for Ayu and for Manu's sake:
What the fair-fingered God brings forth on earth's expanse or in the heightof heaven, that work of his
15 Gods, ye are with the simple ones, ye know each mortal in your hearts;
23. This seat, Rohinî, belongs to Rohita; yonder is the path on which the brindled (female) goes! Her the
1 EVEN to him, swift, strong and high. exalted, I bring my song of praise as dainty viands,
Ye gave him eyes, Nasatyas, Wonder-Workers, Physicians, that he saw with sight uninjured.
8. That earth which formerly was water upon the ocean (of space), which the wise (seers) found out by their skilful
4. Anus have wrought a chariot for thy Courser, and Tvastar, Much-invoked! thy bolt that glitters.
yonder world bethought him again of this world; having returned to this world he had fear of death, for
share; verily they bestow splendour upon him; he becomes resplendent. In the spring in the morning
Agni conveys oblation straight, and deals, as Bhaga deals, his boons.
1. THE Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of heaven: the Son of Aditi can never be deceived.
They bear around him whose long flames are pointed, fulgent among mankind with native splendour.
How long hast thou bebaved as one who wavers? Cast thy hot dart at him who hates devotion:
While he disports him in the wood,6 The steer-strong juice with milk pour forth, for feast and service of the Gods,
3 Yea, come at milking-time, at early morning, at noon of day and when the Sun is setting,
10 As Agni, as the dart burns the dry forest, like the dread shaft burn down the fiends, O Indra;
there is no misfortune (ná-ákam); the 'sitters on the vault' are the home of the sacrificer; in that he puts
6 Borne on both shoulders, O ye Maruts, are your spears: within your arms is laid your energy and
I. THE Sage of Heaven whose heart is wise, when laid between both hands and pressed,
Indu hath, wearing qualities by seasons, on the raised fleece engaged, the ten swift fingers.
2 Let us call Sakra to libations here effused, winner of light who joyeth in the potent juice.
1. INDRA, when Soma juices flow, makes his mind pure and meet for lauds.
banyan-tree), and the parna (butea frondosa). Come thou to us, O arundhatî!
call; in that he offers what has been ladled up four times, he delights the metres, and they delighted carry
To whom as leader of the song, resplendent, worthy of lauds, both Gods and mortals listen.
Rich in sweetness, full of strength, caring for the royal consecration;
(offerings) should he make to whom wisdom does not resort; the minor deities are the metres, the metres
Then may we sing you lauds that shall be fruitful: dp ye not rival all the Gods in greatness?
1. O HEROES lordliest of all, who are ye that have singly come
14 By many a sage whose grass is trimmed thou art continually praised,
Thee, envoy, messenger, oblation-bearer, the Gods have made centre of life eternal.
6. Urged by the sage upon his way, this God speeds forward to the: vats,
10 Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Forests; and let the Immolator, Agni, dress it.
7 He who alone bestoweth on mortal man who offereth gifts,
I knew, and, warned thee, on that day. Thou wouldst not hear me. What sayest thou, when naught
Devotion to the Supreme Lord is so potent that it can reform even the most fallen. In the scriptures, the classical examples of this are Ajamil and Valmiki, whose stories are commonly sung in all Indian languages. Valmiki’s impious deedswere so overbearing that he was unable even to enunciate “Ra..ma,” the two syllables in Lord Ram’s name. His sins were preventing him from taking the divine Name. So, his Guru thought of a way of engaging him in devotion by making him chant the reverse, “Ma Ra,” with the intention that repetition of “Mara Mara Mara Mara…” will automatically create the sound of “Rama Rama Rama…” As a result, even such a fallen soul as Valmiki was reformed by the process of ananya bhakti (exclusive devotion) and transformed into a legendary saint.ulaṭā nāmu japata jagu jānā, bālmīki bhae brahma samānā. (Ramayan)“The whole world is testimony to the fact thatValmiki attained sainthood by chanting the syllables of God’s Name in the reverse order.” Therefore, sinners are not condemned to eternal damnation. On the strength of the transforming power of bhakti, Shree Krishna declares that even if the vilest sinners begin worshipping God exclusively, they should no longer be designated as sinners. They have made a pure resolve and should thus be considered righteous due to their sublime spiritual intention.
12 This good deed have the Rusamas done, Agni! that they have granted me four thousand cattle.
therefore is Vrtra, Vrtra. Indra feared him. He ran up to Prajapati, (saying), 'A foe has sprung up for me.'
9 Ever by us perform thy most heroic, thine highest, best victorious deeds, O Victor.
Ye have invested men, ye Mighty Beings, with manly strength that conquers in the battle.
4 Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders: he licked the ground about the plants he flickered.
14 Now come, ye Asvins, hitherward: here are oblations set for you;
44 Not evil-eyed, no slayer of thy husband, bring weal to cattle, radiant, gentlehearted;
So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch for thee as for the stalk of Soma.
Prajapati desired, 'May I create offspring.' He did penance, he created serpents. He desired, 'May I create
1. Bring us, O Lord, in touch with a wise person who may rightly direct us;
Agni, seven thy tongues'; (with these words) he offers the Agnihotra. Wherever there is anything of his
9 Let him not love to speak ill words: but fear the One who holds all four
the breaths are full within; wherever in the performance of the sacrifice nothing is done, in that place the
The Bull hath propped the heaven and air's mid-region. By thee sent onward let the floods flow hither.
unexpellable. 'O Aditi, do thou confirm', (with these words) be who is being expelled should take the
18 Crying aloud they ran in all directions: One half of them will cook, and not the other.
1. THAT Brahman pleases Indra well, who worships, sacrifices, pours Libation, and prepares the meal.
onward, ye Maruts, drive, like creatures drunk with wine, ye, Gods with all your company.
2. To him apportion his share of villages, horses, and cattle; deprive of his share the one that is his enemy! May
1. Agni,well kindled bring the Gods for him who offers holy gifts;
Unchecked he dwells and prospers in thy law: thy power brings blessing to the sacrificer pouring gifts.
Indra and Vayu is drawn before that for Mitra and Varuna, for the Upançu and the Antaryama (cups) are
Before the Maruts every creature is afraid: the men are like to Kings, terrible to behold.
Be near and taste the pleasant juice, O Asvins: with food, I call you to the sacrifices.
May he by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of Mitra, Varuna, and the Floods!
He bringeth us the booty that he winneth may we, well-loved, continue in his friendship.
1. The divine Agni, holds in His hands many good gifts for men. He conveys our prayers
4 For thou, O Maghavan, art truthful, ne'er subdued and bringest many a Vrtra low.
anoints the ladle; verily he places the head of the sacrifice on its body. Agni was the messenger of the
Lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, the wise man who hath sacrificed,
With hundred powers, with thousand currents, Indu, like a strong car-horse, goes to the assembly.
Brhaspati; Brhaspati is the holy power (Brahman) of the gods; verily with the holy power (Brahman) he
3. Agni, be gracious; thou art great: thou hast approached the pious man,
5 The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who runs his circling course with many round
the bull in the west looking east; the beasts other than the oxen and the horses are not beasts at all; verily
5 With rainy skies and streaming floods, Lords of the strength that bringeth gifts,
2. Stand still, thou lower one, stand still, thou higher one; do thou in the middle also stand still! The most tiny
6 Make me shine bright like fire produced by friction: give us a clearer sight and make us better.
4.3.28 Sukta 28 – Formula in expiation of the birth of Twin-Calves
1. THOU, Agni, who wilt have the strong, hast made me the Soma's priest, to worship in assembly.
4. My speech, not thine, (in this matter) hath weight: in the assembly, forsooth, do thou speak! To me alone shalt
5 He, Indra whom the Angirases' praise delighted, strengthened their prayer and made their goings
Adorning thee, O Singer, like a generous steed for deeds of might,
3 About the holy place, the Steer true, guileless, noblest, hath sent forth
In the previous verse, Shree Krishna explained that the puruṣh (soul) is responsible for the experience of pleasure and pain. Now, He explains how this is so. Considering the body to be the self, the soul energizes it into activity that is directed at enjoying bodily pleasures. Since the body is made of Maya, it seeks to enjoy the material energy that is made of the three modes (guṇas)—mode of goodness, mode of passion, and mode of ignorance.Due to the ego, the soul identifies itself as the doer and the enjoyer of the body. The body, mind, and intellect perform all the activities, but the soul is held responsible for them. Just as when a bus has an accident, the wheels and the steering are not blamed for it; the driver is answerable for any mishap to the bus. Similarly, the senses, mind, and intellect are energized by the soul and they work under its dominion. Hence, the soul accumulates the karmas for all activities performed by the body. This stockpile of karmas, accumulated from innumerable past lives, causes its repeated birth in superior and inferior wombs.
indeed is the march of the thousand (sahásrasyáyana). There are a thousand Stotriyas, a thousand gifts
1. As the-soul with the soul's desires swiftly to a distance flies, thus do thou, O cough, fly forth along the soul's
Purified with the hands, pressed by the men with stones, thou speedest on to mighty booty-bringing
With great light art thou come, O praised by poets! Accept our offering, O thou Sage.
That, nigh where heaven bends down, he made four rivers flow full with waves that carry down sweet
2 For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, growing together, waxing in your vigour.
And ye throw open, Asvins, unto those who win the cattle-stall that thunders with its serenfold mouth.
6. To this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught art thou called forth:
3 Ascend your lightly rolling car, approaching the worshipper who turns him to his duties,Whereon ye come unto the house to quicken man and his offspring, O Nasatyas, Heroes.
I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the Drop which still to one same place is moving.
I would support the singer, God who scatterest wealth! and, not abandon him to woe.
O heavenly Priest, most pleasant, full of wisdom, bring the great Gods to us, and Earth and Heaven.
6 First with Trstama thou art eager to flow forth, with Rasa, and Susartu, and with Svetya here,
saviour-plant do I invoke, that he may be exempt from injury.
the metres that are heavenly. By the sacrifice Prajapati created creatures; he created them by the
He bears him like a bull to drink of Soma juice, and will, as Warrior from of old, be praised for might.
23 Adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, rich in food,
Human nature is such that mere sermons are not sufficient for ensuring good behavior amongst people. Punishment, when meted out in a timely and just manner, is an important tool for reforming sinful behavior in people and training them in right conduct. One of its goals is meant to deter those in society that might be inclined to perform wrong actions. Modern management theory describes very nicely how even one minute of proper punishment for wrong actions and one minute of suitable reward for good actions can rectify people’s behaviors. The desire for victory is universal, but those with the strength of character are not willing to sacrifice morals or ethics to achieve it. That victory which is won by the path of righteousness signifies the power of God. A secret is that which is hidden from public knowledge for a specific purpose. There is a saying in English, “A secret known to one person is a secret; a secret known to two people is no longer a secret; and a secret known to three people is news shouted out to the rest of the world.” Thus, the greatest secret is that which is hidden in silence. True wisdom comes to a person with the maturing of spiritual knowledge through self or God realization. A person endowed with it develops the perspective of seeing all events, persons, and objects in the light of their relationship with God. Such wisdom purifies, fulfills, satisfies, and elevates one. It gives direction to life, the strength to cope with its vicissitudes, and determination to persevere till the end is reached. Shree Krishna says that he is such wisdom that manifests in the wise.
2 Hither hath Soma flowed unto the beakers, like a chariot-horse, a stallion swift upon his way.
Parjanya rain for him. It is black, that is the form of rain; verily by its form he wins rain. It is spotted;
May he, most Godlike, speed our offered viands with homage God-ward on the path of Order.
4 They flee from me dispirited, bent only on obtaining wealths
force he wins force for him; he becomes possessed of force. They should be offered for him who is
Tvastr the two with hairy thighs; the two white-backed for Brhaspati; to Dhatr the speckled bellied one;
Let not the man who plots against us in the night, nor any foe prevail o'er us.
Whom, as adorable and knowing all things, Gods set at solemn rites as offeringbearer.
4 Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state of' babes unborn,
Friendly be they, the Liberal Ones who seek us, yea, those who dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters.
1. To Agni I present a newer mightier hymn, I bring my words and song unto the Son of Strength,
4 I bring, as 'twere, the longed-for milk, the dear milk of the Sister-Pair.
cattle, that he may not be cut off. He attains fortune, and obtains cattle who knows thus. The wife is led
Give splendour, fixt and measured well, to him who brings the sacrifice.
4 Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Rsis who sate them down to their austere devotion:
4 Who, Agni, in alliance with thy foeman, what splendid helpers won for them their riches?
the Soma. The remains of it Tvastr cast upon the Ahavaniya (fire), saying, 'Hail! wax great, Indra's foe.
5. This divine tree, the varana, shall shut out (vârayâtâi)! The gods, too, have shutout (avivaran) the disease that
Him, blazing Agni! who hath worked us mischief, consume thou utterly like dried-up stubble.
be sky and earth' [5], he says; verily he invokes this blessing. If he were to say, 'easy of access and easy
Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents' powers, they robe them, for our welfare, in the height of
win for us, obtain the advantage by (her) magic! May she come to us full of abundance! Let them not win this
would perish. If two were lost, two months of the year would be omitted, and the sacrificer would
with it. Then indeed was he propagated. He who desires, 'May I be propagated', should sacrifice with
Where, Indra-Varuna, is now that glory wherewith ye brought support to those who loved you?
and yonder sun as the twenty-first. So many are the worlds of the gods; verily in them in order they find
Whetting thy bold and thy sharp blade, O Indra, crush thou the foe and scatter those who hate us.
2. Celestial, bounteous giver, girt about with might, rich, mountain-like, in pleasant things,-Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, brought hundredfold and thousandfold.
3 Like grateful food, like some wide dwelling place, like a fruit-bearing hill, a wholesome stream.
at the midday pressing, and on twelve potsherds at the third pressing; verily they obtain and win the
12. Who for ourselves, O thou most wise, is wealth and fair intelligence,
When men adorn the Ancient with oblations, these seek, as on two chariot-seats, the dwelling.
8 O Soma, terrify us not; strike us not with alarm, O King:
6 He, while he cleanses him, invoked of many, hath flowed to give the people all enjoyment.
with the Savitr-vessel; people are connected with the All-gods, the tub is connected with the All-gods,
He, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, makes his days lovely in his might and splendour.
the bad and the good are on the same level, the fire is the light, the evening is the darkness; in that [5] he
Sādhaks (spiritual practitioners) follow different paths of spirituality to reach the Absolute Truth. Shree Krishna previously described those who are devotees. They surrender themselves with devotion at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, in the attitude of being His eternal parts and servants. He now describes some of the other paths that sādhaks follow.Those who follow the path of jñāna-yog consider themselves to be non-different from God. They contemplate deeply on sūtras such as: so ’haṁ (I am That), śhivo ’haṁ (I am Shiv), etc. Their ultimate goal is to attain realization of the Supreme Entity as the undifferentiated Brahman, which possesses the attributes of eternality, knowledge, and bliss, but is devoid of forms, qualities, virtues, and pastimes. Shree Krishna says that such jñāna yogis also worship Him, but in His formless all-pervading aspect. In contrast, there are varieties of aṣhṭāṅg yogis etc. who see themselves as distinct from God and relate to Him accordingly.Still others worship the manifest universe as God. In Vedic philosophy, this is called viśhwaroop upāsanā (worship of the cosmic form of God). In western philosophy, it is called “Pantheism” from the Greek words pan (all) and theos (God). The most famous exponent of this philosophy has been Spinoza. Since the world is a part of God, keeping a divine sentiment toward it is not wrong, but it is incomplete. Such devotees do not have knowledge of the other aspects of the Supreme Divine Entity, such as Brahman (God’s undifferentiated all-pervading manifestation), Paramātmā (the Supreme Soul seated in everyone’s hearts), and Bhagavān (the personal form of God).How can all these divergent approaches worship the same God? Shree Krishna answers this in the following verses.
Arjun was a proclaimed warrior, but due to his righteous nature, he tried to avoid violence whenever possible. This side of his character is well revealed in an incident that took place towards the end of the Mahabharat war.Duryodhana was badly injured, and only a handful of warriors were remaining on the Kaurava side. Ashwatthama was one of them. He wanted to avenge his father Dronacharaya and his friends Kauravas' death. He sneaked into the Pandava camp at night while everyone was fast asleep andwent ona carnage. Several warriors including Draupadi’s five sons were killed in this attack. The Pandavas, along with Draupadi and Shree Krishna were away that night. When they returned to the camp, they were devasted. Arjun went after Ashwatthama, caught him and threw him at the feet of Draupadi, who was grieving the death of her young sons. Bheem was raged and wanted to kill Ashwatthama right way, but Draupadi was a soft-hearted lady of forgiving nature. She said that Ashwatthama was their Guru Drona’s son and a Brahmin, therefore, they should forgive him. Arjun was unsure what to do next and wanted guidance from Shree Krishna, who then said, “A respect-worthy Brahmin must be forgiven even if he may have temporarily fallen from virtue. But a person who approaches to kill with a lethal weapon must certainly be punished.” Arjun understood what the Lord meant; he did not kill Ashwatthama. Instead, he cut his brahmin’s tuft, removed the jewel of immense power from his forehead, and let him go.ṛitvikpurohitāchāryair mātulātithisanśhritaiḥbālavṛiddhāturair vaidyair jñātisam bandhibāndhavaiḥ(Manu Smṛiti 4.179)“One should not squabble with, the Brahmin who performs the fire sacrifice, the family priest, teacher, maternal uncle, guest, dependent children, elders, doctor or relatives.”Arjun was aware that killing one’s own relatives was a great sin. He said to Shree Krishna, “Greed has blinded them (Kauravas) and they do not realize that it is a great sin to kill their own relatives and friends, but why should we do the same thing, when we can avoid this transgression?”
4 Victorious, to be hailed with joy, O Soma, flow, delighting men,
When does a person complete the practice of Yog? The answer is when the controlled chitta (mind) becomes fixed and focused exclusively on God. It is then simultaneously and automatically weaned away from all cravings of the senses and desires for worldly enjoyment. At that time one can be considered as yukt, or having perfect Yog. At the end of this very chapter, he also states: “Of all yogis, those whose minds are always absorbed in me, and who engage in devotion to me with great faith, them I considerto be the highest of all.” (Verse 6.47)
Let us draw Indra with true deeds anear us: he loves our songs, the Hero, and is potent.
3 Within my mouth, Brhaspati, deposit speech lucid, vigorous, and free from weakness,
The calling of the pious rang around them. What portion will these kine afford their owner?
supports the manifold breathing, moving thinas, shall afford us cattle and other possessions also!
9. That earth upon which the attendant waters jointly flow by day and night unceasingly, shall pour out milk for us
1. YE Gods, raise up once more the man whom ye have humbled and brought low.
7 The men, the sages with their hymns, eager for help, deck thee strong &teed,
Ceaseless they movelnopposite directions: men mark the one, and fail to mark the other.
14 To this hath Minya's wisdom brought us, so as to aid, as aids the poet him who worships.
(brick); these worlds are separated by Indra and Agni; (verily it serves) to separate these worlds. Now
5 The offspring of a lofty Power, Daksa's Two Sons exceeding strong,
f From every rule of thine, O King Varuna, set us free;
there is a pair. If a man knows the ten weapons of the sacrifice, his sacrifice is in order at the beginning.
heaven. 'May I not be cut off from seeing thee; what heat is thine, to that of thee may I not be brought
9 There hath the Sun-God mounted up, who scorches much and everything.
5 O Indra-Varuna, as ye created all these creatures of the world by your surpassing might,
As men who win with sacrifices Indra's thought, men who win Indra with their lauds.
Vrtra entered him. Vrtra is the belly; hunger is man's enemy; he who [6] knows this slays the enemy
embryo is dropped prematurely would go to ruin; he should offer before (the others) on twelve potsherds
stick) of Vikankata wood; verily he wins radiance; he puts on one of Çami, for atonement. 'Do thou sit
As with the ladle the parts of the oblation in the sacrifice,
To us and to our sons give refuge: keep afar all unobserved hostility.
sun with darkness; the gods desired an atonement for him; the first darkness of his they struck off
Deer-skins are on their shoulders, on their fellies knives: they spread their glory out as birds spread out
2 Come hither, Agni; sit thee down as Hotar; be thou who never wast deceived our leader.
3. The new-born Vritra-slayer asked his mother, as he seized his shaft,
they conquered the earth, the Gayatri metre; for eight the Rudras, they conquered the atmosphere, the
12 Thou, Agni, givest hero fame: Bhaga and Savitar the God,
for the brilliance of consecration and of penance do I offer to thee.
I. NOT to forsake me, I invoke this Indra girt by Maruts,
3 Ensign of sacrifice from of old, Agni well knoweth with his thought
turn back for me (upon the sorcerer) the sorceries with aggressive amulets!
verily they find support in the year, the world of heaven. Now there is the chief (day), and those who
18 By their own power these Twain in close succession move;
11 O Holy Agni, give us wealth renowned with men and strengthening life.
Drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches: drink thou thy fill of meath and pour it down, O Indra.
6. With the gracious (waters) do I delight thy heart, mayest thou, free from disease, full of force, rejoice! Clothed in
with infinite wisdom. Bless us to becoming fearless and highly motivated. We surrender ourselves O
9 O Indra, send us riches, thou Omniscient, worthy of our praise:
6 Like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest, the twain with their ten girdles have secured
sacrifice [1]; in that the Agrayana is drawn on the next day, where they have seen the sacrifice, thence
Convey thee hither, steeds with their white backs, to quaff sweet juice that makes us eloquent!
4. Pour on us lofty glory, send sure riches to our liberal lords:
animals except the hamsa bird, (thus) do I with this (charm) ward off thy poison.
5 Who among you, O Maruts armed with lightning-spears, moveth you by himself, as with the tongue
Wise Bhrgus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and found him lurking where the floods are
h Homage to you that have chariots, and to you that are chariotless homage!
let us pay honour; to strength hail!' he says; strength is food; verily he wins food [2]. He offers on the
2 May he the Immortal, Helper, bard to be deceived among mankind,
2.4.3.12 Mantra 12: The Asapatna and other Bricks of the Fifth Layer
3. Thou art the daughter of the Asuras, thou art the sister of the gods. Sprung from heaven and earth, thou didst
When fiends lay there upon the ground extended like cattle in the place of immolation?
Vaiçvanara; verily they put light before them, to reveal the world of heaven. There is a fore offering,
2 Car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoked, soon guided, first in deeds of might,
9. Now do we speak to Bhava and Sarva, to Rudra and Pasupati; their arrows do we know well: these (arrows)
34 Three are the voices that the Courser utters: he speaks the thought of prayer, the law of Order.
3. The bull is bellowing; the cows are coming nigh: the Goddesses approach the God's own restingplace.
Or, Indra, when thou fightest girt by heroes, we in the glorious fray with thee will conquer.
Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness: win. quickly with our meath that meath in battle.
7 She bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices. The flushing Dawn is sung by the Vasisthas,
verily he has recourse to Soma, the strong; verily he bestows upon him seed and strength; he does not
We ask you to steer us away from an evil path. Please put us on a course which has your blessings.
3 Sate you, according to your wish, O Indra-Varuna, with wealth:
the waters down below the fire, (they serve) to overcome his foe; he prospers himself, his foe is
7 Indra and Agni, come to us with favour, ye who conquer men:
Young, Sovran Rulers, Varuna and Mitra, the wise and very glorious Adityas.
6 Bestow illustrious fame on us, both on our liberal lords and me,
3 With splendour, Agni, Son of Strength, thou who art worshipped, wakeful One.
24 Not earth, nor heaven, nor firmaments contain the Thunder-wielding God:
Pour ye it out, then fill the vessel full again, for so the God regardeth you!
5 Urged by the holy singer, sped by song, come, Indra, to the prayers,
3 Now like a swan he maketh all the company sing each his hymn:
15 Of Dasa Varcin's thou didst slay the hundred thousand and the five,
3 So, bringing treasure, dawn to-day on us thou Daughter of the Sky,
With haste, that he may help, as the bard's cherisher. Indra who findeth wealth for you.
go up to her; with 'Utter', he raises (the pail); with 'We that do utter', he sits down beside her, and with
For in carouse I think of thee, O Soma, Shall I, as a rich man, attain to comfort?
2. Preparing what is unprepared, and bringing store of food to man,
share; verily they bestow on him the drinking of Soma, the drinking of Soma comes to him. In that it is
her into the waters, saying, 'Come out for Indra.' She came out in the shape of a red draught animal with
therefore the cow feeds with the second half. Him who knows thus these two enjoy. The oblation is a
The mortal band, discerning in the distance, found Agni standing in the loftiest station.
homage to your [5] custom, O fathers; homage to your anger, O fathers; homage to your terrors, O
formidable; Ravat! Hail! Thundering without lightning, lightning, raining, resplendent; Ravat! Hail!
By fire he surmounted fervour, by speech holy power, by a gem forms, by Indra the gods, by the wind
1. ALLIED with thee in friendship, Indra, these, thy priests, remembering Holy Law, rent Vrtra limb from
6 Leeches are ye with medicines to heal us, and charioteers are ye with skill in driving.
And we, the singers, have received the caldron of metal which was heated for Pravargya.
The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities will conquer those who worship not.
5 What God shall we worship with our oblations? The One who made the solid Earth and the vast sky;
Bestowing by your Godhead sacrifice and wealth, great fame and strength for us and good heroic
g Ye two are firm, loose; united guard me from trouble.
27. With (the oblation) to which the gods flock, which is free from failure,-with it Indra, the slayer of Vritra, shall
6. To Vishnu, to the mighty whom the Maruts follow, let your hymns born in song go forth, Evayamarut!
As per the Shreemad Bhagavatam, there are three ways to realize God:vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayambrahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śhabdyate (1.2.11)“The knowers of the Truth have stated that there is only one Supreme Entity that manifests in three ways in the world—Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān.”This does not mean that these three are different entities, God is one, and these forms are only his manifestations. As water exists in nature as ice, water, and steam that have different physical properties; but are forms of the same substance; likewise, God exists in three forms Brahman, the formless, omnipotent and omnipresent. The followers of jñāna-yoga worship God as Brahman. The aṣhṭāṅg-yoga seeks God as Paramātmā, the Supreme Soul who resides in the hearts of all living creatures. Whereas, Bhagavān is more personal and can be considered the sweetest among his form. Here, God manifests as a person and performs sweet Leelas (pastimes). The devotees of the Bhākti-yoga savor this form and immerse themselves in his loving bliss, as explained earlier in verse 12.2.In this chapter, Shree Krishna has described all three forms of God. But which of them is the most complete? Here, in this verse lies the answer. Shree Krishna says those who know Him as the Supreme Divine Personality and worship him as Bhagavān truly have complete knowledge of Him.Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj in his book Bhakti Śhatak has given a detailed explanation of why Bhagavān realization is the highest. He has quoted the same verse 1.2.11 of the Shreemad Bhagavatam and said:tīna rūp śhrī kṛiṣhṇa ko, vedavyās batāya,brahma aura paramātmā, aru bhagavān kahāya. (Bhakti Śhatak verse 21)“Ved Vyas has declared that the Supreme Lord manifests in three ways—Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān.” Then he goes on to describe these three manifestations of the Absolute Truth.sarvaśhakti sampann ho, śhakti vikāsa na hoya,satchitānanda rūp jo, brahma kahāve soya. (Bhakti Śhatak verse 22)“As Brahman, the infinite energies of God are all latent. He merely displays eternal knowledge and bliss.”sarvaśhakti sanyukta ho, nāma rūp guṇa hoya,līlā parikara rahit ho, paramātmā hai soya. (Bhakti Śhatak verse 23)“As Paramātmā, God displays His Form, Name, and Virtues. But He does not engage in Leelas, nor does He have associates.”sarvaśhakti prākaṭya ho, līlā vividha prakāra,viharata parikara sang jo, tehi bhagavān pukāra. (Bhakti Śhatak verse 24)“The aspect of God in which He manifests all His energies and engages in various loving Pastimes with His devotees is called Bhagavān.”Through these verses, Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj has explicated that; while in His manifestation as Brahman and Paramātmā God does not reveal himself completely; but as Bhagavān, He manifests himself with all his Names, Forms, Virtues, Pastimes, Abodes, and Associates. This complete realization of the Supreme Entity has also been explained earlier in verse 12.2, with the example of a train. Thus, those who seek God as Bhagavān, the Supreme Divine Personality can truly acquire complete knowledge of Him.
Your car, assuming many a shape, most often goes to the Soma-presser's place of meeting.
to him he creeps to the Sadas, for his own safety.
May Plants, the Waters, and the Sky preserve us, and Woods and Mountains with their trees for
Brhaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber.
6 Like a car-horse who shows his strength, a God effused for Deities.
Thou flowest, Soma Pavamana! balmed with 'milk unto the meeting-place of Gods.
1. Sing forth to him, the holy, most munificent, sublime with his refulgent glow,
25 Hence, and not thence, I send these free. I make thee softly fettered there.
7 That Agni hath been set most kind in camp of men, in sacrifice like a Lord victorious, like a dear Lord
He, dark-backed, manifold with varied aspect, hath made them burst forth from their food the brushwood.
3. Ye cows, protect the fount: the two mighty ones bless the sacrifice.
16 The Gods be gracious unto us even from the place whence Visnu strode
offers) to Agni, the purifier [2], thereby he bestows speech upon him; in that (he offers) to Agni, the
8 Sing forth to him, the Holy, most munificent, sublime with his refulgent glow,
To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, whose first draught, God, thou takest as thy portion.
w For thou art, O son, a singer, seated at the feast;
5 O ancient Herald, be thou glad in this our rite and fellowship:
9. Not for an ample price dost thou, Stone-caster! give thyself away,
3. They sing their song like women active in their tasks, along their common path hither from far away,
Be victorious like a king; thou rulest within without a foe.
2 He who filled full his belly with the Soma's juice, Maghavan, was delighted with the meath's sweet
holy power: was created, the lord of holy power was overlord. They praised with fire, beings were
Even as a herdsman driveth forth his cattle, he goeth, first, uninjured, fain for treasure.
Listen thou to the prayer of me a later sage, hear thou a later sage's prayer.
At this libation is your gift of treasure. Let gladdening draughts approach you after Indra's.
8 Come in a friendly spirit, come to us, O Maruts, and hear his call who praises you, Evayamarut.
fragrance of the healing bdellium, diseases flee in every direction, as antelopes and as horses run.
6 Sakra who knoweth well all human actions hath with his eager Friends let loose the waters.
causes it to go to the world of heaven. He anoints it in three places; these worlds are three; verily he
At present, there is no single place where Dharmins (‘Hindus’) can go to download and read ALL their
He utters aloud (the direction to the Agnidh) for Vaiçvanara, he offers the offerings of the Maruts
who is long in exile has recourse to sky and earth with their own share; verily they establish them; he is
his fire; in that he puts (them) down in unison, verily he piles them in unison with himself; he is not
In thy care, Maghavan rich in kine! they have increased exceedingly.
and bestowed it upon them. Then the metres ran away, and the sacrifice followed the metres. Then the
fourfold is the beginning of the sacrifice; verily on the east he establishes the beginning of the sacrifice.
Thou with fierce shout hast made the woods and rivers roar: did not men run in crowds together in their
9 Three times a hundred Gods and thrice a thousand, and three times ten and nine have worshipped
7 Refresh the horses, win the prize before you: equip a chariot fraught with happy fortune.
these are the lights of the sky; verily he wins them; the Naksatras are the lights of the doers of good
3 Who graspest with thy might on earth. e'en the strong sovrans of the wood,
g The praised of the praised art thou, may the praised milk strength for me, may the praised of the
Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread in thine offspring, thou who cravest children.
2 Hear, Indra, thou whom men in every fight must call to show thy strength, for cry of battle with the
p The two which slay the Raksas, which slay the spell, and which are of Visnu.
of the waters; I place thee in the womb of the waters; I place thee in the stronghold of the waters.
1. To Rudra bring these songs, whose bow is firm and strong, the self-dependent God with swiftly-flying
16. The plants release us from Agni Vaisvânara. Spreading over the earth, go ye, whose king is the tree!
May we see Turvasa and Yadu: thy great deed, O Hero, must be glorified.
and night, hail!' he says; verily by means of day and night he begets offspring for him, for in accord with
2. As with a hundred hosts, he rushes boldly on, and for the offerer slays his foes.
Maruts, this strength of yours no wisdom comprehendeth: through their gifts' greatness they are
speech, to Agni and Visnu the body Of him who long is ill. For him who is long ill or who desires, 'May
5 Agni, be this our sacrifice eternal, with brave friends, rich in kine and sheep and horses,
5 Father of cattle, father of all steeds art thou. O Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.
2 And, O Nasatyas, man's dear Priest is seated, who brings to sacrifice and offers worship,
the vault' to the world of heaven; the vault is the world of heaven; for him for whom these are put down
1. On flows the potent juice, sustainer of the heavens, the strength of Gods, whom men must hail with
4 Thou, Agni, art spread widely forth, Priest dear and excellent; through thee
3 The tribes of men praise thee, Agni, who knowest well burnt offerings, the Discerner, lavishest of
1. Flow forth, O Soma, flow thou onward, sweet to Indra's,
1. I Hear, as though 'twere close at hand, the cracking of the whips they hold:
7 Gods, Mitra-Varuna, with love and worship, let me make you delight in this oblation.
The Friendly One seeks human generations, destroying, still new bands of evil beings.
9 Indra hath hurled down the magician Vrtra who lay beleaguering the mighty river.
he fastened the thunderbolt on his right side, for victory. He created offspring without expiration; on
9 May our laudation of you Twain, lovers of meath! be sweet to you.
3 How hast thou, follower of the Law eternal, become the knower of a new song, Agni?
1. Bring forth oblations to the God who knoweth all who fain would drink,
infolded, with these two companions of Indra do I pursue the conquered (king) with my army.
May they, now pure, yet purify themselves further; may they conduct us to the heavenly world!
3 A hymn, O Priest, to him who hears, the gentle, to him who looks on men, exceeding gracious,
3. Away from us may thousand-eyed, immortal (evil) dwell! Him whom we hate may it strike, and him whom we
The matron calls to the Strong God whom pressers of Soma have encouraged int the dwelling.
3 As nourishers we tie the thread, and, liberal with our bounty, offer sacrifice.
6 As one who drives a car draws in his reins, may we draw Pusan near,
8 We may have committed sins against friends and family members.
1. The God declares the deities' generations, like Usana, proclaiming lofty wisdom.
born of summer; from the Tristubh the Aida (Saman); from the Aida the Antaryama (cup); from the
5 Let the strong Maruts hear him, him surpassing all men: strength be his
Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up the reins like chariot-drivers.
offspring are closer to him than himself. He drinks warm milk, and rubs himself with bubbling water;
4 Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help us: these offerings have we made for you; accept them.
Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, and keep malignities away.
h Praise [3] the famous youth, mounted on the chariot seat,
3. Reverence we offer, O Bhava, to thy roaring, to thy breath, and to thy injurious qualities; reverence to thee, O
1. LOUD as a river's roaring wave thy powers have lifted up themselves:
7. Between this heaven and earth thy noise shall spread, thy sounds shall quickly part to every side! Shout thou
regarding whom they have doubts as to (admitting him to) common meals or to marriage. It should be
q Winning holy order, winning truth, host-conquering, having a good host, with foes within, with foes
two worlds burst apart; in that he says, 'O Agni, come hither for enjoyment', it is for the separation
d This on the left, collecting riches; the leaders of his host and bands are Senajit and Susena, and
out-breathing, as well as through-breathing; speech, mind, heart, brahma, and wisdom, do thou furnish us with
third (mess) for the Adityas [1], (saying) 'Let this labour be for enjoyment to me'; they said, 'Let us
Yea, of itself thy thunder goes forth like the roaring of the heaven.
11 He dressed a hundred buffaloes, O Indra, for thee whom all accordant Maruts strengthen.
(offerings); the Angirases offered the oblation, then the Adityas saw these two offerings, and offered
1.9.67 Mantra 67 – Soma and Others (Authors: Saptarsis, Pavitra Angiras)
Apart, the Sanctifiers, in succession, come to the famed hymn, praised in holy verses.
3 Victorious, great is he; in manly battle shines, unstained with dust, his might, as shines a mountain
and which leads me to wide stepping Visnu, the friend of the pious, and whose abode is all bliss.
6. About thee (my husband) I have placed the overpowering (plant), upon thee placed the very overpowering one.
4 O Surya, with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom, and with thy ray impellest every moving thing,
7. In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadru's Soma juice
the kushtha-plant was born. This kushtha, a universal remedy, stands together with soma. Destroy thou every
Even thus, the Gods seem moving round about me, the fountains and bestowers of our riches.
As such assail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether the foes be strangers or be kinsmen.
3 This all the pious sing to us, and sacred poets evermore:
Lauded in manly mode may Indra-Visnu grant us their powerful defence and shelter.
Giving us victory over all our rivals. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
waters verily give being from non-existence.' He who desires prosperity should offer to Indra (a cow)
The offerings which we bring to you shall never fail gifts brought by us shall never fail.
That this more glorious fuel may send forth for thee its shine to heaven. Bring food to those who sing
15. The amulet which Brihaspati tied for swift Vâta, that comforting amulet king Varuna did fasten on; that verily
11 The pressing-stones are set at work: the meath is poured into the tank,
every form', (with these words) he strokes the calf; verily he piles it up and makes it piled with cattle. He
different colours, to Brhaspati a white one; verily by means of them they restored his brilliance, For him
15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasistha, lauded, Gods set on high above all other beings.
Tlou whom this hatchct, with an edge well whetted for great felicity, hath brought before us.
white-backed, the white-rumped, these are for Indra and Brhaspati; the white-footed, the white-lipped,
5 To him this mighty eulogy, to Indra hath this our laud been uttered by the poets,
5 Speed happily those, as Surya ends his journey, who meet his wish as bridegrooms meet their
Ye gods that are on the prastara and sit on the strew [2].
1. This Brahman, comer at the due time, named Indra, is renowned and praised.
Tuirning towards thee that art turned towards me, O house, I come to thee that injurest me not. For Agni and the
to say that formula, the sacrificer would be without offspring or cattle. 'With offspring, with increase of
Slay thou the enemy both near and,far away: grant us security and ample pasturage.
Slew Ahi, and sent forth the Seven Rivers, and opened as it were obstructed fountains.
won the atmosphere and gave (the thousand). He caused sacrifice to be made by the Adityas with the
1. WE as thy friends have chosen thee, mortals a God, to be our help,
When on the sieve the Golden-hued is cleansed, he rests within the vats as one who seats him in his
3 I laud the ruddy steeds who pour down blessing, dropping oil, flectest through the thoualit of Order.
None, Varuna and Mitra, harins the mortal, man who honours and obeys your laws.
We make thee keen, the Mighty One, succour us: inspire us, Maghavan, when we defy the foe.
Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser: and may I be his priest to win him glory.
8. Carry forth, O woman, this full jar, a stream of ghee mixed with ambrosia! Do thou these drinkers supply with
men through the Çukra and Manthin, whole-hooved animals through the season-cups, kine through the
Earlier Shree Krishna had said that of the Vedas he is the Sāma Veda, which is rich with beautiful devotional songs. Now he says that within the Sāma Veda, he is the Brihatsama, which has an exquisite melody. It is typically sung at midnight.The Sanskrit language, like other languages, has distinctive systems of rhymes and meters for writing poetry. The poetry of the Vedas is in many meters. Amongst these, the Gayatri meter is very attractive and melodious. A famous mantra set in this meter is the Gayatri mantra. It is also a deeply meaningful prayer:bhūrbhuvaḥ swaḥ tatsaviturvareṇyaṁ bhargo devasya dhīmahi dhiyo yo naḥ prachodayāt (Rig Veda 3.62.10)[v31]“We meditate upon the Lord who is illuminating the three worlds and is worthy of our worship. He is the remover of all sins and the destroyer of ignorance. May he illumine our intellects in the proper direction.” The Gayatri mantra is a part of the sacred thread ceremony for young males, and is recited as a part of the daily rituals. The Devi Gayatri, the Rudra Gayatri, the Brahma Gayatri, the Paramhansa Gayatri, and several other Gayatri mantras are also found in the Vedas.Margsheersh is the ninth month of the Hindu calendar. It falls in November-December. The temperature at that time in India is just right—neither too hot nor too cold. The crops in the field are harvested at this time of the year. For these reasons it is often the favorite month of the people.Basant (spring season) is known as ṛitu rāja, or the king of seasons. It is a time when nature seems to be euphorically bursting forth with life. Many festivals are celebrated in spring, epitomizing the joy that pervades the atmosphere. Thus, amongst the seasons, spring manifests God’s opulence the most.
15 Soma, for Indra's drink do thou, led by the men, well-wcaponcd and most gladdening,
e Stretching the thread of the atmosphere do thou pursue the light;
10. All the Pisâkas that devour the avakâ-reeds, that burn, and spread their little light in the waters, do thou, O
And drave, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like a bird's young after the egg's disclosure.
connected with Varuna; 'Arise, thou of fair sacrifice', 'Arise, erect, to aid us', with two (verses) addressed
s Bring forward the parents born of old with now songs,
13 Praised through my prayer be ye who should be lauded. Ye have increased our wealth, ye Dawns
Whom mortal priests, men, with their strong endeavour, supplied with dainty viands, have created.
9 Flow rich in sweets and lovely for our Bhaga, Vayu, Pusan flow
with a milch cow; verily he buys it with milk for the mixing: he buys (it) with a bull; verily he buys it
confer power on them. Transversely he puts (them) down; therefore cattle move their limbs transversely,
has declared the ten-night rite to be the prosperity of the Sattra, and the ten-night rite serves for the
39 No man, not any, goes upon the path on which the Cedis walk.
May all in whom rest splendour and great riches obtain refreshment in these sacrifices.
is the foe of man. In that the girdle is of Çara grass, he clearly drives away the enemy hunger from the
6 Enrich us, O thou Priest of many aspects, with the Gods, Agni, with thy fires, enkindled.
9 Lord of Strength, Caster of the Stone, destroy the firm forts built by men,
Even thine who furtheredst life with a God's own power, freeing the floods. All that is godless may he conquer with
I. Arising in thy might, thy jaws thou shookest Indra, having drunk
Thou givest him who largely pours libations his goods who pours not, for his own possession.
8 To him the Hero, on high days of prowess, heroes for help and booty shall betake them.
1. O Come ye hither, sit ye down; to Indra sing ye forth your song,
18 Soma, as Sura, bring us food, win offspring of our bodies: we
6 Strong is the steed, the man a sage in eloquence, the bowman is a hero hard to beat in fight,
Speech went away from the gods, not being willing to serve for the sacrifice. She entered the trees. It is
21 They whose high glory in a moment like the God, the Sun, goes round the space of heaven,
consecrated were to leave (the shed), he would be likely to spring up and slay him. He must not leave, to
The pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to possess the best of all the cattle.
f For a prop, a support, of the five five-peoples I take thee.
sacrifice was protected, and the sacrificer. In that the fore- and after-sacrifices are offered, protection is
8 He, Pavamana, high o'er man yoked the Sun's courser Etasa
5 Watchful in spirit, born on cars, impetuous, listing to his cry,
18 Hero, assume the might wherewith thou clavest Vrtra piecemeal, the Danava Aurnavabha.
overpower those who practise hostility; overpower enmity, overpower those who practise emnity; thou
1. LET thy Bay Horses, yoked, O mighty Indra, bring thy car hither fraught with every blessing.
Welcome them, O ye Heroes, and come bither. Loud may we speak. with brave men, in assembly.
2. Forth come to us with all his fires that Agni, whose the mighty are,
7 Ye Twain have seated you as Lords of Wealth, as one who mounts a car to him who sits upon the
6 This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this might of thine:
d The nights of thine, O Savitr [1], that go, traversed by gods,
Holding aloft the radiant lights of Surya, as messenger of heaven he shines with treasures.
tuft, for men anoint with (a stalk) which has no tuft; (verily he anoints them) for discrimination. If he
16 How may we serve the Liberal Ones with worship, the Maruts swift of course in invocation, the
16. Full of nurture, full of milk, fixed upon the earth, erected, holding food for all, O house, do thou not injure them
1. THESE hymns that drop down fatness, with the ladle I ever offer tothe Kings Adityas.
3. The upper part of the womb do I place below, there shall come to thee neither offspring nor birth! I render thee
the second are sixteen with the Atiratra. To those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of thirty-three
6 Here is the light of heaven, here allis lovely; here there is radiance, here is air's wide region.
Whom men have set in foremost place like Mitra with their eulogies.
And, while rejoicing in the juice, seeketh prosperity for friends, lauding his own imperial sway.
2. For Indra the sublime, the far-pervading, have singers generateo prayer and praises;
4 The horse would draw an easy car, gay hosts attract the laugh and jest.
5 As such we Gotamas with hymns extol thee, O Agni, as the guardian Lord of riches,
Our wealthy patrons who are governors of men, who part, as gifts, the stall of kine!
The strong assigned to him who sings and praises. May Gods with Indra at their head protect us.
Thou Radiant One who ceasest not to shine for those who sing thy praise, highborn! delightful with thy
Raging with jaws of gold among the growing plants, like heaven with all the stars, he quickens earth
9. Flow to us, Indu, very strong, effused, with wealth of kine and, steeds,
2. Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid
set down from above, (it serves) for firmness. The Dhruva is the life of the sacrifice, the Hotr is the
6. Then do I see them and also do I hear them; their sound, their voice doth come to me. When, ye goldencoloured, I have refreshed myself with you, then I ween, ambrosia (amrita) am I tasting!
2. The dames of Trita with the stones urge forth this goldencoloured one,
the words) 'Thou art the wealthy, thou art the brilliant, thou art the gainer of good', verily he makes
These numbers were arrived at by taking a merger of the number of Suktas per Kandha based on the:
On her all-lovely car she comes, the Fair One, and brings rich treasure for her faithful servant.
Sit down in front in thine own birthplace, in due order;
The strength-bestowing gift is then made ready, which spread in front, with tongues, erect, he drinketh.
2 May Indra come to us with Tawny Coursers, inclined to us, to favour and enrich us.
1. King Pavamana is implored with holy songs, on man's behalf,
2 Thee, worth invoking, in the din of battle, heroes invoke in fray for life and sunlight.
Lord of the Earth, he with his might repressed them: still lay the herd and the affrighted herdsman.
portion of the butter; that is then the atonement. If men disturb his victim and he wish of them, 'May
5 Thine is that milk which thy swift-moving Parents brought down, a strengthening genial gift for
4 What was spread out she weaves afresh, re-weaving: the skilful leaves his labour half-completed.
missiles from thee; may the fifteenfold Stoma support thee on earth, may the Praüga hymn establish
e Ye twain shall be summoned, O Indra and Agni [1],
1. INDRA, the mortal man well guarded by thine aid goes foremost in the wealth of horses and of kine.
and his power. In that at the new moon there is (an offering) to Agni on eight potsherds, and curds for
Shree Krishna explained in verse 2.14 that the contact between the senses and the sense objects gives the mind the experience of heat and cold, joy and sorrow. As long as the mind has not been subdued, a person chases after the sensual perceptions of pleasure and recoils from the perceptions of pain. The yogi who conquers the mind is able to see these fleeting perceptions as the workings of the bodily senses, distinct from the immortal soul, and thus, remain unmoved by them. Such an advanced yogi rises above the dualities of heat and cold, joy and sorrow, etc.There are only two realms in which the mind may dwell—one is the realm of Maya and the other is the realm of God. If the mind rises above the sensual dualities of the world, it can easily get absorbed in God. Thus, Shree Krishna has stated that an advanced yogi’s mind becomes situated in samādhi (deep meditation) upon God.
42. O Bride! May your wishes for happiness, for children, for financial well-being, and for being blessed, be
5 Four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting together in the same container.
a Thou I art the abode of riches for me; thou art the resort of the afflicted for me; protect me when in
In Magha days are oxen slain, in Arjuris they wed the bride.
To the true one, let us offer an oblation rich in ghee.
Decked as our envoy let the Sage bring hither and conciliate the Thrice Eleven Deities. Let all the
hail! To the waters hail! To plants hail! To trees hail! To moving creatures hail! To swimming creatures
19 God! You are the mightiest. You can make us mortals happy.
Waters! no man is there who gives more horses than Savistha gives.
recourse to Indra with his own share; verily he gives him cattle; verily he becomes possessed of cattle; it
12 Slay enemies, animate men whom ye befriend; bestow upon us progeny and aff luence.
With them together let the Vrtra-slayer drink in his home the worshipper's libation.
5. The poison of the sarkota (scorpion) that creeps low upon the ground, (after he) has been deprived of his
8 The Swans, the Vrsaganas from anear us have brought their restless spirit to our dwelling.
18. Purified by (our) prayer, and clarified by the ghee are the soma-shoots, (and) these sacrificial grains. Enter the
Its axle, heavy-laden, is not heated: the nave from ancient time remains unbroken.
found (vitta) she helped them; thou art the resort of the afflicted for me', he says, for she helped them in
it is (offered) to Savitr; verily instigated by Savitr he gains it; to earth an oblation is offered; in this what
He hath come nigh from the sky's farthest limit: the Steer hath waxen in the waters' bosom.
2 With soma they brought Indra from a distance, Over Vaisanta, from the strong libation.
2.1.4.27 Mantra 27: The Cup for Agni with the Wives of the Deities
They gave themselves new names when Soma juice was shed, and under these new names the
The juices that exhilarate are mingled. Injure us not, but come with happy fortune.
1. DRINK thou this Soma, Indra, Lord of Soma; drink thou the draught of noonday which thou Iovest.
25 Come thou to this great rite of ours, Vayu! to give us vigorous light.
May the great song of praise divine, reach Indra who is the King of prayer the Gods' creation.
cattle'; Tvastr is the form-maker of the pairings of cattle, and thereby he confers upon himself the form
11 Thou who in every way supreme in earthly power, rejoicing, by thy mighty strength hast waxen
2. Whom with fair helm, in rapture of the juice, the firm resistless slayers hinder not:
The very Strong hath gained the waters by himself, the strong gained many a resting-place.
So make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal worshippers.
7 Blest, Agni, be the man, the liberal giver, who with his lauds and regular oblation
16 Best Mother, best of Rivers, best of Goddesses, Sarasvati, We are, as 'twere, of no repute and dear
the eastern quarter; (the brick) which he put down on the right became the right side, that is the southern
c Agni is the deity, Gayatri the metre, thou art the vessel of the silent offering. Soma is the deity,
Pleased with the corn-blent offering which we bring thee, may Indra, Friend, hear his friend's adoration.
11 They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, the forest trees, the earth, the waters, and
8 Over the earthly region flow thou on thy way, helping the praiser and the pourer, thou Most Wise.
11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight where spoil is gathered,
3. The empire of the Ruler of the Earth and the boundless skies is far-flung. The two mighty oceans are his loins
High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts and entertainment of the Gods.
5. Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, sage, for good fortune, in the waters' lap.
The theologians say, 'He indeed would really sacrifice, who having sacrificed with the Agnistoma
Together with the sunbeams, with the shine of pure refulgent flames, highborn! delightful with thy
7 Now hath the Rsi splendidly thought out the Asvins' hymn of praise.
7 When I and Indra mount on high up to the Bright One's place and home,
the head of the fire; verily he piles the fire with its head. He becomes possessed of a head in yonder
4.7.39 Sukta 39 – ?? Charm pronounced by the Bride over the Bridegroom
then the strength of one day only will belong to the rite.' The first day takes place on the night of new
mountains,When heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm and breaks the strong in pieces.
14 May we in safety pass by those who slander us, leaving behind disgrace and hate.
1. NOT one of you, ye Gods, is small, none of you is a feeble child:
3 O Soma Pavamana, thou art flowing to be Indra's drink:
shall hand us over to death: then shall we be united with the cooked (porridge)!
cloud-formed are for Parjanya; three goats with dewlaps are (to be offered) to Indrani; three ewes are for
1. Agni we choose as envoy, skilled performer of this holy rite,
7 Never, O Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate: we walk as holy texts command.
4 For, Soma, thou hast been effused, strengthening for the wild carouse,
naturally perforated bricks are these worlds; with these exclamations Prajapati was propagated; in that
He deeply piercing many a thing hews it like wood with fervent glow.
May he increase our store of wealth and listen to this call of ours.
k O broad atmosphere, in unison with the god [1] wind, sacrifice with the life of this offering; be united
He rose, a light, that kills Vrtras and enemies, best slayer of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes.
May he vouchsafe us triply-barred protection. O Earth and Heaven, within your lap preserve us.
celestial Soma whom Lopamudra, representing fervent Prayer, succeeds after long labour in drawing
Bring weal from heaven that men may dwell securely. May we o'ercome the foe's malign oppressions,
Renunciation is important because it is the basis for higher life. It is only by giving up the lower desires that we can cultivate the higher aspirations. Likewise, it is by giving up lower actions that we can dedicate ourselves to higher duties and activities, and walk the path of enlightenment. However in the previous verse, Shree Krishna revealed that there are differing views on the true understanding of what renunciation actually entails. Having mentioned the two primary opposing views in the previous verse, Shree Krishna now reveals his opinion, which is the final verdict on the subject. He says that he will expound upon the subject by dividing renunciation into three categories (described in verses 7 to 9). He addresses Arjun as vyāghra, meaning “tiger amongst men” because renunciation is for the brave-hearted. Saint Kabir said:tīra talavār se jo laṛai, so śhūravīra nahīṅ hoyamāyā taji bhakti kare, śhūra kahāvai soya [v2]“One is not brave by virtue of fighting with arrows and swords; that person is truly brave who renounces Maya and engages in bhakti.”
4 The heavenly Victor, he whose priest is Kanva, Trta with Dyaus accordant, Vata, Agni,
Thou and my mother, O Good Lord, appear alike, to give me wealth abundantly.
6 For Indra Thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk and meath,
[3], he says. Brhaspati is the holy power (Brahman) of the gods; verily by the holy power he wins this
birth', he says; wealth is cattle; verily he wins cattle. With six (verses) he pays reverence; the seasons
3 Thou very Mighty One, whose hands by virtue of thy greatness grasp,
2. Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee when they seek thine aid:
14 Six men, yea, two and two, made glad with Soma juice, come near to me
Yea, blest to us for wealth and weal. This will we ponder praising strength, this ponder as we praise the
For ye are visible helpers in the time of trouble: like fires, aglow with light, save us from shame and
Savitar, God, the lovely-handed, led us, and at his sending forth we flow expanded.
1. THE three times seven Milch-kine in the eastern heaven have for this Soma poured the genuine
son's only, how is the father's common?' That which spills when the fore-sacrifices are offered is not
4. Loosen from us, O Varuna, all fetters, the uppermost, the nethermost, and those imposed by Varuna! Evil
who smites in the stronghold.' He plucked out a bunch of Darbha grass, pierced the seven hills, and
17 Vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the cow who ne'er hath calved, Sabardhu,
Wide as a sea our longing hath expanded, fulfil it, O thou Treasure-Lord of treasures.
Shree Krishna says that people worship the devatās (celestial gods) as per the prescribed rituals to attain material gains. Material desires have shrouded their knowledge. Hence, they forget that the Supreme Lord is the source of all that exists, including these celestial gods. As a president of a country appoints his officers among different departments. Similarly, these celestial gods also occupy different positions in the working of God’s creation. They derive their powers from God; they are not independent of Him. They can bestow on their devotees only material things that are under their control. But cannot liberate anyone from the bondage of Maya or the cycle of birth and death because; they themselves are not liberated from this cycle. God alone has the power to do so. The celestial gods are also souls like us. However, they have attained these positions in the celestial abodes as a result of their pious deeds from previous lives. Once their account of pious deeds depletes, they have to return to earth. Hence, even the celestial gods are perishable; God alone is eternal.
it should not rain, on the next day he should offer an oblation. Mitra and Varuna are day and night, by
1. As a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of good deeds,
2. Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press-stones, mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy filter-Indu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens for the God's enjoyment.
Carers for Vatsa, through our prayers and lauds, O yewho hearour call.
2. O Indra, let thy long-maned bays, yoked by prayer, bring thee hitherward!
11 So come to us our hearts' desire, the bounty bestowed by thee, from heaven and earth and waters,
8. I praise this God, parent of heaven and earth, exceeding wise, possessed of real energy, giver of treasure,
4 For he, the God of all men, hath gotten him might that quelleth foes.
But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well-dressed woman to her husband.
13. May the alert and the watchful divinities guard thee, may he that sleeps not and nods not guard thee, may he
He who hath come unto his friends with friendship, like a fleet steed who never trips or stumbles.
9. Indra and Wishan will we call for friendship and prosperity,
to recover his own. 'There is not monotony then', they say, 'if one pays reverence day by day.' If a man
Hotar of all oblation, worthy of our choice, Lord, beaming, trusty friend to one who loveth him.
8 Drink thou the Soma for our help, bright, vigilant, exceeding strong,
b Him whose is that which breatheth, which winketh, which moveth,
21 That which the white-ant cats away, that over which the emmet crawlsMay all of this be oil to thee.
For there is none but only thou to show us race, O Maghavan, thou much invoked.
10 Now let that wealthy Cow of thine, O Indra , yield in return a boon to him who lauds thee.
To the strong band of Maruts cleave for happiness, the chasers of the sky, impetuous, vigorous.
Good horses and good cars have ye, O Prsni's Sons: ye, Maruts, with good weapons go to victory.
Only the active conquers dwells in peace, and thrives: not for the niggard are the Gods.
1. Sing ye a song to Soma brown of hue, of independent might,
mix that together: to both of you it shall belong; bring it together into a single place!
e With the Angirases, the gods, as deity, with the Pankti metre, I yoke thee; with the winter and cool
10 We turn to thee as Giver, liberal Indra. Lord of the Bay Steeds, be not thou ungracious.
15 When in the time of night, in Khela's battle, a leg was severed like a wild bird's pinion,
(Atrin)! Neither aider, nor support do they find; smiting one another they go to death.
c Thou art barley (yava); bar (yavaya) from us foes, bar evil spirits.
9 Neglect all pious men with skill in sacred song: come hitherward,
And, with the Gods and Dames accordant, Tvastar; Dyaus with the Gods and Prthivi with oceans.
Acting the Sage, he flows enrobed in waters and song as 'twere a stall that kine may prosper.
8 Rejoice in full accord with the Adityas, in concord with the Parvatas, O Rbhus;
Good Lord, the Father made thee slayer of the fiends, made thee, good Lord, to slay the fiends.
Because this day hath Dhisana the Goddess set drink for you: the gladdening draughts have reached
d Thou art the goat, resting on wealth, sit on the earth, mount aloft on the atmosphere, in the sky be thy
2 Thee, as thou art, desiring wealth Gotama worships with his song:
5 The sacrifice made Indra strong when he unrolled the earth, and made
2 Craving the kine, rushing against the mountain led on by Law, with holyminded comrades,
verily he has recourse to Mitra and Varuna with their own share; verily they by day and night beget
7 This Singer excellent at sacrifices, Agni the Priest, they glorify with homage.
7 Welcome to thee be this our hymn, reaching thy heart, most excellent:
9 He passes o'er the broad earth like a Stega: he penetrates the world as Wind the mist-cloud.
1. The glittering maids send Sdra forth, the glorious sisters, closeallied,
9 With those delightful aids which thou hast, Soma, for the worshipper,Even with those protect thou us.
it; therefore did Tvastr prosper; therefore cattle are said to be Tvastr's. Manu established it; therefore did
As it is cooked by the fire when thou art spitted,
the year he removes his rivals for him; there is one to the Maruts [6]; the Maruts are the subject class
true speech an oblation; to Savitr of true instigation a cake on twelve potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a
4 I trust you Lord! To be holier than holiest; I trust you Lord! To be the mover of the immovable;
Who with a bounteous guerdon welcomes hymns of praise: for him flows down the abundant stream
1. THIS Chariot-horse hath moved along the pathways, and Pavamana flowed like rain from heaven.
When, Indra, wilt thou honour us with opulence, all-nourishing and much-to-be. desired, O King?
4 Ensign of sacrifices, he, Agni, with Gods is come to us,
Agni I consecrate thee', he says; this is the consecration of Agni; verily he consecrates him with it. 'With
Cast thy dart, knowing, Thunderer, at the Dasyu; increase the Arya's might and glory, Indra.
Indra was as it were loose and unfixed. He was afraid of the Asuras. He ran up to Prajapati; he gave him
wins strength; it has four corners; verily he finds support in the quarters [1]. He who knows the
He hath come hither with (lightnings) that smile like kindly (women);
all the deities are Agni [3], the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the deities and the sacrifice. Now Agni
the man of royal caste incurs not the anger of (her), his mother.
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame.
1. DRINK, Indra; juice is shed to make thee joyful: loose thy Bay Steeds and give thy friends their
oblation to the Vrtra slayer; they slay him at the full moon [4], but make him swell at the new moon;
1. HIGH hath the Mighty risen before the dawning, and come to us with light from out the darkness.
Vayu is thy yoke-fellow, O steed; I grasp thee; bear me prosperously [1].
5 As to the chariot pole a vigorous courser, this laud is brought to the great strong Upholder.
2. O hero, Lord of bounties, praised in hymns, may glorious fame and might
For whom the Adityas make his pathway ready, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, accordant.
anything except (the cup) for Indra and Vayu. The tenth day is the end of the sacrifice, (the cup) for
When, with the ten that dwell together closely joined, the men whose hands are skilful cleanse the
having piled up a fire does not display splendour; in that he puts down the Aditya bricks, yonder sun
They govern at the sacred place and bear the sacrifice to Gods.
Come, Son of Strength, o'er whom, Invoked of many! the godless hath no power to keep thee distant.
Him swift we seek. for foodful booty rich in kine, brought hundredfold and thousandfold.
Bestow upon him bounty meet for praises. May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
As on one mightier thou hast dawned, on Satyasravas, Vayya's son, high-born! delightful with thy
5 Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in thy might:
33 And now to Vasa Asvya here this stately woman is led forth,
Him, too, Sarasvati and Agni further, and there is none to rob him of his riches.
Graciously favour us, Indra and Soma; give us firm standing in this time of danger.
5 O Maruts, from the Ocean ye uplift the rain, and fraught with vaporous moisture pour the torrents
5 Thou hast created earth to look upon the sky: thou, slaying Ahi, settest free the river's paths.
purifying and auspicious to us', he says; the purifying (one) is food; verily he wins food. With two
2 Let the Bull sing with Bulls whose toil is worship, with a loud roar like some wild beast that hungers.
Wearing as wool Parusni for adornment, whose joints for sake of friendship he hath covered.
4 Who, O ye Maruts, may attain the mighty lore of you the mighty, who may reach your manly deeds?
4 They shrink not from the birth; in this same manner still resting there they purge away reproaches.
Granting him sons and lineal succession, let us not, bold ones! move the Gods to anger.
Be thou faced with ghee and with thy birthplace of ghee;
Had lain in cruel bonds, immersed and wounded, suffering sore affliction, in the waters.
seed in one direction in an encircled (place), and he becomes rich in cattle. With (a verse) addressed to
5 Yea, Much-invoked! in safety through thy glories alone thou speakest truth as Vrtra's slayer.
15 Accordant with the Gods choose for our Friend the Waters' Child: may he be good to us.
he becomes possessed of a village. It is of many forms, for it is connected with many deities; (verily it
May they, the Bright Ones, make our praise-song perfect, and, when we laud them, grant us all our
28. The amulet . . . has come to me together with all 'kinds of prosperity.
Beside the singer, Asvins, who longs for your grace and lauds you both. Lovers of sweetness, hear my
open to question' at the morning pressing'; he who knows thus is not liable to question from his foe;
11. His heralds bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all that lives,
Thou, entering the saucers as a man the fort, gold-hued hast settled in the wood.
people become fain to give to him. He upon whom what is as it were ready to be given is not bestowed
4 Sending the shelter which we ask, the foeless Savitar and the Rivers shall approach us.
and fright, do we place into the enemies: beat them down, O drum!
Who makes surrounding regions part asunder,and shows apparent all existing creatures.
Who, sent by Indra and advised by Varuna, have gotten for themselves a share of Surya's light
4 They who approached the God's abode with homage, eager for glory, won them perfect glory:
10. All strength and valour that is found, Indra, in tribes of Nahushas,
2.3.3.2 Mantra 2: The Mantras for beginning the Stotra and the Pratigara
victoriousness and might. There is a Jyotistoma Atiratra, for the revealing of the world of heaven. There
gazelle for the Maruts; the Çarga to the Brahman; the hyena, the black (deer), the dog of four eyes, the
True, circumambient? what to Earth, O Agni, what wilt thou say to man-destroying Rudra?
6 Thou with thy might didst grasp,the holder-up of heaven, thou who art mighty also in the seats of
a food of the village, honey of the wild; in that he anoints with curds mixed with honey, (it serves) to
Terrific wielder of the ancient thunder. filled full with splendour as a jar with water.
7 Born in the loftiest heaven thou in a moment reachest, like wind, the place where Gods inhabit.
7 The kindler of the flame wins Agni as a Friend, promoter of the Law, whose face is bright with oil.
raises its head aloft, so the sacrificers are highest among people. The Udgatr mounts a throne; verily
which attend him as he performs the vow. Headed by Visnu the gods won these worlds by the metres so
deem they can use. The back cross-line is thirty feet, the eastern line is thirty-six feet, the front cross-line
7. Wonderful, with thy favouring help, send us thy bounties, gracious Lord.
thing. He puts down the circular bricks; the circular bricks are these worlds; the citadels of the gods are
18 A crushing Warrior, passing rich is Maghavan, endowed with all heroic might.
They seemed to long for kine when I departed. Hence, into distance, be ye gone, O Panis.
To thee the Cow is sum of all things grateful when with the wish thou seekest men and princes.
3 Indra, with Marut Friends grown strong, hath rent asunder Vrtra, and
3. The men enkindle Agni in his threefold seat, ensign of sacrifice, the earliest bousehold-priest.
No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth we pervade,
4 Brhaspati, when first he had his being from mighty splendour in supremest heaven,
Viraj two heifers are for earth; two oxen that drag the carriage are (to be offered) to Vayu; two black,
m The quarters, the Pradiçes, the Adiçes, the Vidiçes, the Uddiçes.
4 He who made all that lives, who passes all in might, who orders service to the Gods,
With hymns may I turn hither Indra to mine aid,-the Car which like a strong steed hasteth to the call.
1. (Thyself) a male, step thou upon the hide of the male (steer): go, call thither all that is dear to thee! At whatever
3 Lay this with care on that which lies extended: straight hath she borne the Steerwhen made prolific.
12. Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Pavamanas in a stream, girt by the Maruts, gladdening, steeds with
1. We compass thee like water, we whose grass is trimmed and Soma pressed.
Let them approach, here let them listen,Agni, Varuna, Mitra, Lords of fair dominion.
13 With new protections, Indra, like an archer, open thou forus
there be splendour', he should surround it with a Gayatri, the Gayatri is splendour; verily there is
2 With stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowed with strength in store
4 Dealing out food unto their people there they sit, like wealth to him who comes, more than the back
8. In Time tapas (creative fervour) is fixed; in Time the highest (being is fixed); in Time brahma (spiritual
14 For Indra flows the gladdening drink, the measurer of the region, Sage,
1. Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, Dasas here belong.
Have been effused and poured into the beakers, swiftly like rivers running lowly seaward.
8 You of a truth day after day, O Asvins, that he might win the very plenteous torrent,
The sun is the self of all that moveth and standeth.
twelve potsherds. To Mitra and Varuna, of the Anustubh (metre), the Ekavinça (Stoma), the Vairaja
12. Him that fashions spells, practises magic, digs after roots, sends out curses, Indra, shall slay with his mighty
Well-sharpened are his jaws which may not be withstood: the Child of Strength hath powerful teeth.
1. This Bull, this chariot robes him in the sheep's long wool as heproceeds.
11 That swelling band I call with invocation, the brood of Rudra, armed with glittering lances.
46 A hundred thousand have I gained from Parsu, from Tirindira,
three hundred and thirty-three [2] and sacrifices with Soma for which he has paid a good price. They put
2. Red, like a mare, and beautiful, holy, the mother of the kine, The Dawn became the Asvins' friend.
5 Therefore together with our strong companions, having adorned our bodies, now we harness,
(Stoma), for the winning of food; verily also by it he is propagated. There is an Ekavinça (Stoma), for
5. Indu, enlightener, dear, the thought of poets, hath flowed clearly, like a charioteer who starts the steed.
9 We strengthen, Satakratu, thee, yea, thee the powerful in fight,
Who tells the lofty birth of him the Lofty One, shall verily surpass in glory e'en his peer.
2. For, Agni, thou art now the promoter of strength auspicious,
the seasons would be confused [3]; therefore in order the Adhvaryu sets out by the southern (door), the
after uniting (them) he separates (them), therefore the holy power separates from the kingly power. With
Ma not the din of frequent battle-carnage arise, may the arrow not fly when the day of Indra has arrived!
3 To me they told it, and they came with winged steeds radiant to the draught,
4 He unto whom they sang the seven-headed hymn, three-parted, in the loftiest place,
When, like a pitcher full of gold, O Asvins, on the tenth day ye lifted up the buried?
Past even the foeman's manifold libations, glorified with our hymns, true Wealth-bestower.
reverences) the tail with the seasonal Yajñayajñiya; verily he finds support in the seasons. He pays
4 Pleased be the Eternal Lord who loves the household with this man whom God Savitar created.
1.2.32 Mantra 32 – Various Deities (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada
17 Lord! Be our preserver. Look after us and be merciful to us, your worshippers.
Thy car, O Maghavan, thy Bays are strong as bulls: thou, Satakratu, art a Bull.
45 O Agni of the Bharatas, blaze high with everlasting might,
1. HASTING like some strong courser good at drawing, a thought have I imagined like a workman.
for Surya. The Atigrahyas are the support of the sacrifice, the Prsthas are the two wheels, if he were not
High heaven's Sustainer at the central point of earth, raised on the fleecy surface Pavamana stands.
the piling, he prepares its [3] body and mounts it; the sacrificer thus prepares his body, in that he piles
10 With all the Gods, with Indra, with Vayu, and Mitra's splendours, drink,
He as the truer Priest shall offer worship, for the Gods' generations well he knoweth.
28 Her hue is blue and red: the fienod who clingeth close is driven off.
1. Glorify naught besides, O friends, so shall no sorrow trouble you!
4 How is the Sage extolled whom the loud singers praise? What voice, what hymn is used to laud
28 Agni, Most Youthful of the Gods, send evermore the gift of wealth
2. Arise, and arm yourselves; friends are ye, O divine folk! May our friends be perceived and protected by you, O
who practises witchcraft does not lay him low. He who desires, 'May I live all my days', should offer a
14 When thou hast mounted on thy car let thy yoked Bay Steeds carry thee,
Resplendent, pure, sublime and purifying, again, again he renovates his Mothers.
oblation of beans to Soma and Pusan; verily he has recourse to Soma and Pusan with their own share;
Of the lord's cows a thousand, I Kaksivan. His deathless glory hath he spread to heaven.
Vayu, 'Make him sweet for us' [1]; he replied, 'Let me choose a boon; let your vessels, be said to have
Protect us by three hymns, O Lord of power and might, bright God, by four hymns guard us well!
They, neither Gods nor men in estimation, like Api's sons have godless sacrifices.
18 Drive ye that Tawny Courser, O ye pressers, on his way to war,
5 Thou winnest swift advancement for thy servant, through hymns, Lord of Bay Steeds, which thou hast
Pressing the Soma, ask riches from me alone: ye, Purus, in my friendship shall not suffer harm.
Thy Bay Steeds, Indra, fraught with weal tb, consent to come.
2 Not this way go I forth: hard is the passage. Forth from the side obliquely will I issue.
Great Agni, served with reverence and oblation, flies ever to the sacrifice, the Faithful.
5 Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward the Father of the earth, Father of heaven:
8 The Brahman Atri, as he set the press-stones, serving the Gods with praise and adoration,
7 I speed to you with powers that should be honoured, with songs distinguishing Heaven's mighty
2 Pour out for Indra, Thunder-armed, the milk of heaven,, the Soma's juice,
5 An earlier gift for you have I accepted eight cows, good milkers, and tree harnessed horses,
Young, faithful, sage, preeminent o'er many, kindled among the folk whom he sustaineth.
offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the racer, for a race [5] he desires to run, who is fain to conquer
gaze on men are the learned, Dhatr is food; verily on birth he gives him food; therefore on birth he eats
Ekastaka. The Ekastaka is the wife of the year; on that night he dwells with her; verily they consecrate
13 Agni, Atharvan brought thee forth, by rubbing, from the lotus-flower,
clouds [3] of the sky, hail!' he says; verily he procures rain for offspring when born; 'Go to Agni
I saw thy head still soaring, striving upward by paths unsoiled by dust, pleasant to travel.
6 She sends the busy forth, each man to his pursuit: delay she knows not as she springs.
connected with all the gods; verily he buys it for all the gods. These,, make up ten. The Viraj has ten
21 Now let the godless man approach who hath received reward so great
4 Smadibha, Tugra, and the Vetasus I gave as prey to Kutsa, father-like, to succour him.
sterile (without giving me to the Brahmans), he shall be bound in the fetters of death!'
Both Sages, with the flight of Law come hither unto those who live.
6 The man who, sweating, brings for thee the fuel, and makes his head to ache, thy faithful servant,Agni, to him be a self-strong Protector guard him from all who seek to do him mischief.
What time the flashing arrows play in combat, may we through you be winners in the contest.
Thee we extol, enjoying through thy favour life long and joyful and with store of heroes.
14 The starting-place, his place of rest and rolling, the ropes wherewith the Charger's feet were
8 O Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upastuta's most potent voice reveres thee.
22 For Indra girt by Maruts, flow, thou Indu, very rich in sweets,
Labouring at their task the men laid open the stall of Kine though firmly closed and fastened.
Him let us worship, set within the dwelling, the red, the golden-hued, the allresplendent.
2 Thou, Indra, art the Conqueror: thou gavest splendour to the Sun.
15 Agni we laud that he may keep our foes afar, Agni to give us health and strength.
1.9.6 Mantra 6 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Asita Kasyapa, Devala Kasyapa)
14 In the sky's borders hath she shone in splendour: the Goddess hath thrown off the veil of darkness.
25 Pressers, for him blend Soma juice, each draught most excellent, for him
shoots; verily he protects him. The shoots are the vital airs, Soma is cattle; he later lets go the shoots;
By means of the sacrifice the gods went to the world of heaven; they reflected, 'Men will follow after us
To thee safe resting in the seat of Order the Cow alone upon her way proceedeth.
7. Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool of the sheep,
3 Sages shall glorify Agni with earnest thoughts, ensign of sacrifice, who fills the synod full:
f Be ye pure for the divine rite, for the sacrifice to the gods.
who is long in exile should offer a cow to sky and earth; for he is not established in them; verily also he
They gather together the sacrifice when (they gather the dust of) the foot-print of the Soma cow; the
sacrifice destroyed. If it should break, he should unite it with the selfsame potsherds; that is the
that, to prevent its being stolen. 'Thou art the good luck of the sacrificer', he says; verily thus the
a Thou art secure; may I be secure among my equals, wise, a guardian, a granter of wealth.
Lopamudra taururn [mariturn suum] ad se detrahit: insipiens illa sapientem anhelantern absorbet.
May they, the Mighty, giving ear, establish this sacrifice, to make us free and sinless.
Or stablished on a field deep-spoiled and fruitful. So may we share the meath that loads your car-seat.
8. The preparation of the sacred fire (agnyâdheyam), the consecration for the soma-sacrifice (dikshâ), the
5 To him, as in wild joy he fought with him who stayed the rain, his helpers sped like swift streams
verily he bestows vital airs upon cattle; two by two he lets them go; therefore the vital airs are in pairs.
2 He offers safety like a pleasant home, like ripened corn, the Conqueror of men.
Be thou most near to us for bliss, a friend to aid!
We serve the brilliant God with adorations, we glorify, the splendid name of Rudra.
whom they bring in large measure, is himself pleased, and gives to another. One should offer in full and
The ocean is unique in its ability to maintain its undisturbed state, despite being inundated by the incessant flow of rivers into it. All the rivers of the world constantly empty themselves into the oceans, which neither overflow nor get depleted. Shree Krishna uses the word āpūryamāṇaṁ (filled from all sides) to describe that even the rivers pouring all their water during the rainy season into the ocean cannot make it flow over. Similarly, the realized sage remains quiescent and unmoved in both conditions—while utilizing sense objects for bodily necessities, or being bereft of them. Only such a sage can attain śhānti, or true peace.
Guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit. He who is wise takes Guerdon for his armour.
4. This sweetest Soma juice hath been expressed for you at morning rites.
yonder world. 'To thought I offer with mind, with ghee, that the gods may come hither, delighting in the
Indra, Lord of Bay Steeds, accept these fitting hymns, hymns which we have thought out for thee.
Sweet, with the Plants, to Gods who seek oblations. May liberal Bhaga speed us on to riches.
So with sweet-sounding tongues for us sacrifice nobly in this rite:
thee. Removing far the flesh-devouring Agni, a barrier do I set around thee, that thou mayest live.
a I buy Soma from thee, strong, rich in sap, full of force, overcoming the foe, the pure with the pure I
servant. In that they perform the lesser Stoma after per forming the greater there is uniformity [4]; to
2 In whom, Leader of sacrifice, the seven reins, far extended, meet;
5 He found the wavy sea of brilliant colours in forefront of the Dawns who dwell in brightness.
heaven. When the gods went to the world of heaven, the quarters were in confusion; they saw these
6 By Agni Agni is inflamed, Lord of the House, wise, young, who bears
for the Pitrs prepared by Agni he milks a beverage from a cow which has to be won over (to another
10 Varuna, Mighty, with a thousand eyes, beholds the paths wherein these rivers run.
day and night offspring are born. 'Go to Mitra and Varuna, hail!' he says [2]; verily he bestows
causes the sacrificer to wax great. 'Pious', he says, for he aids the gods, 'With all boons', he says, for he
14 When on your three-wheeled chariot, O Asvins, ye came as wooers unto Surya's bridal,
18 May be, unchecked, strong, meet for praise, bring hundreds, thousands forth to light,
cake) for Agni on eight potsherds is unmoved at the full and at the new moon, (it serves) to conquer the
4 And he who did these things, where is that Indra? among what tribes? what people doth he visit?
They by their deeds of strength have won diem, mighty wealth, who have set all their hope in thee.
2 They laud thee in their solemn rites, Agni, as Minister and Priest,
By the wise cleansings of the meath made holy, through days, and nights they speed the swift streams
5 We laud and praise his several deeds of valour who, fatherlike, with power hath made us stronger;
become speakers of speech, for all attain prosperity. There are the three days, Jyotis, Go, and Ayus. The
The Vasat cry cleft the head of the Gayatri; the sap thereof fell away. Brhaspati seized it; it became a
atmosphere metro, sky metre, seasons metre, Naksatras metre, mind metre, speech metre, ploughing
d Homage to the cheater, the swindler, to the lord of burglars homage!
Ye who delivered even from the wolf's deep throat and set again at liberty the swallowed quail.
2. Indu flows on for Indra's sake,-thus have the deities declared.
Thou, aiding Gods, didst quell the power of Dasas, what time thou holpest many a race, O Indra.
Thou art of old the Cherisher of singers let not the rich who bring no gifts deceive thee.
5 The wrathful Indra with his bolt of thunder rushing on the foe,
21 To Indra sing a song of praise, Hero of mighty valour, him
For we go forth to war against the mighty make heaven and earth well stablished by thy cleansing.
3 Indra and Agni we invite, the Soma-drinkers, for the fame
As one who cometh first with full stream she is milked the Soma is impelled to this man's holy rites.
4 Winner of thousands, he, this Soma, flows along, raising a vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn.
7 This Dawn hath yoked her steeds afar, beyond the rising of the Sun:
13 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessed, to the worshipper,
Prajapati in real presence he piles the fire, he does not go to ruin; the white horse is the form of day, the
Cut ye with skill, so that the parts be flawless, and piece by piece declaring them dissect them.
Protect our sacred grass from man's reproaches. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
Rajanya, for the Rajanya is connected with the Tristubh. He casts the ash into the waters; Agni's place of
offspring and cattle he connects. 'Thou art wealthy; for the plants thee! Quicken the plants', he says;
Those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom. Excited now to speed they run unresting.
Excellent Lord, 'tis strange tome, no wish have I to sing the psalm that Pajra sings.
4 He made himself by might Lord of all living things, and strong in vital power waxed great above them
6 Indra and Agni, ye cast down the ninety forts which DAsas held,
Uniting with the sea, the wave of waters, the mighty tells his fourth form and declares it.
manner of Angiras, O pan; may the wives, the goddesses, connected with the All-gods, prepare thee on
Accept, O Maruts, graciously this hymn of mine that we may live a hundred winters through its power.
5 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great riches un der his control,
6 Most near, most oft comes Indra with protection, and she Sarasvati, who swells with rivers Parjanya, bringing health with herbs, and Agni, well lauded swift to listen, like a father.
2 The Speaker, unassailable Master of this hymn, the Tongue of sacrifice pours forth the pleasant
7 Flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, she moves along her ample volumes through the
3 With flame insatiate, like eternal might; caring for each one like a dame at home;
1. Time, the steed, runs with seven reins (rays), thousand-eyed, ageless, rich in seed. The seers, thinking holy
This juice is shed by us that ye may quaff it: on this trimmed grass be seated, and rejoice you
1. With what help will he come to us, wonderful, everwaxing friend?
13 Him, varied in his form, the lovely Infant of floods and plants the blessed wood hath gendered.
Drink this expressed ere yesterday and give riches to him who offers it.
manner of Angiras; with the Tristubh metre I grasp thee in the manner of Angiras.
2. This host of foemen Maghavan! that cometh on in warlike show-Meet it, O Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, and Agni, with your flames!
breath, to Vayu hail! Kikkita thy eye, to Surya hail! Kikkita thy ear, to sky and earth hail! Kikkita, thy
son, bring him here (A gamaya), thou that comest here (Agame)!
peers; it contains the word 'sit' (sad); verily he makes him attain reality (sat-tvám). 'Come forward, O
18 Within the house hath sate the King immortal of mortals, filling full their sacred synods.
Brought together from the waters, from the plants, from the trees;
9 Hear us, O Agni, in your common dwelling: harness thy rapid car of Amrta.
piling; verily he piles Agni Vaiçvanara; Vaiçvanara is the form dear to Agni; verily he wins the form
5. May heaven and earth look after me, may all the gods support me! O ye Angiras, O ye fathers devoted to
He smote his three heads from his body, seizing the cattle of the oniniform Son of Tvastar.
He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between the eastern and the western limit.
5 A firm light hath been set for men to look on: among all things that fly the mind is swiftest.
7. Ascending from the darkness of death to the highest firmament, to Sûrya (the sun), the god among gods, we
1. GREAT, verily, is Indra's might. I have beheld, and hither comes
So with oblation let us serve thee, Indu, and so let us become the lords of riches,
sacrificer appropriates the power and strength of his enemy. 'He who performs more rites of sacrifice',
house. If he were to set out without extinguishing the smouldering embers, it would be like a con fusion
So, through your Deity, both Gods, enrich us with all pleasantness.
2. This fire has confused the schemes that are in your mind; it shall blow you from your home, blow you away
Oblation with the holy verse, O Agni, bearer of our gifts.
for Mitra and Varuna is to be slaughtered for them at the new moon. In that [4] he sacrifices on the day
2 Agni the God the first among the Immortals, - of his auspicious name let us bethink us.
Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, sacrifice, holy text, prayer, and exalted speech.
10 Their paths, of old connected, rest uninjured; they with great might preserve the immortal statutes.
9. Jaundice from thy limbs, diarrhoea from within thy bowels, the core of disease from thy inner soul do we charm
5 I offer my prayers and oblations to divine Visnu and beneficent Rudra.
7 Come the two first celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, arranging sacrifice for man to worship
the syllables which are over the verse; if he were to close with a Jagati [1], he would end the sacrifice;
22 God, working with mankind, flow on; to Indra go thy gladdening juice:
Rbhuksan, Vaja, and divine Vidhatar, Parjanya, Vata make our food abundant.
Him who bestows at once a hundred thousand gifts none shall restrain when he would give.
the metres he produces offspring for him. He makes Dhatr first; by him he scatters, Anumati gives
30 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this wicked fiend,
of the weak, on the other the slayer of the Rakshas.
4 Agni most bright and fair with song we honour, yea, the adorable, O Jatavedas.
2 They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men: they cry aloud to us with their green-tinted
on the right, the wise one with the Rudras behind, and Viçvakarman with the Adityas on the left. In that
At this your coming nigh, ye Lords of ample wealth and all good things, may we obtain.
Soma-drops, fain for you, over the wether's fleece, Somas over the wether's fleece.
Indra slew Vrtra; he forced out his skull-bone, it became the wooden tub, from it the Soma flowed, it
s Thou, O Agni, hast the radiance of the sun; grant me life, radiance, and offspring.
misfortune; verily he has recourse to Indra, deliverer from tribulation, with his own share; verily he
Urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our service of the Gods.
N.N. of the forest', he says; verily from the cattle of the village he sends pain to those of the wild;
the kingdom he wins the king dom for him; he becomes the kingdom. They should be offered for
There saw I, going thither in the spirit, Gandharvas in their course with wind-blown tresses.
All-gods.' It did not become firm. They said to it, 'Be firm for Agni.' It became firm for Agni. In that (the
3 With hymns the deft priest is about you, Asvins, the eloquent priest attends you now, Nasatyas.
sap of the metres; in that he offers the cow to Mitra and Varuna, he again delights the metres, to drive
Agni hath taken them from earth and heaven, from the sea under and the sea above us.
sacrificer with brilliance. He rubs it all around; verily he places brilliance in him completely. 'Support
Cutting their paths according to his pleasure day after day flow to their goal the rivers.
That thou mightst move us to abundant comfort of very splendid wealth with store of horses.
Follow their ways, as if with feet, and guard from injury mortal man.
thousand, he makes her the measure of a thousand [7]. He offers to her forms; verily he unites her with
west, he would mingle the breaths, he would be liable to die. The Hotr is the navel of the sacrifice; the
b May I grasp thee with the arms of the Açvins.
help, come hither,Your chariot, swifter than the mind of mortal, fleet as the wind, three-seated O ye Mighty.
I bring thee blessed strength, I drive thy weakening malady away.
28 When thy two beautiful Bay Steeds grew great and greater day by day,
Excellent Agni, thou art called my Providence: delight thou to be liberal.
expelled, they should be offered for him, placing him on a mound and cooking a Brahman's mess of four
4 Let not the wolf, let not the she-wolf harm you. Forsake me not, nor pass me by or others.
Just as darkness can never engulf the sun, similarly, illusion can never again overcome the soul who has once attained enlightenment. Tadviṣhṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśhyanti sūrayaḥ “Those who have realized God always remain in God-consciousness.”Under the illusion of Maya, we see the world as separate from God, and establish friendship or enmity with other human beings depending upon whether they satisfy or harm our self-interest. Divine knowledge that comes with enlightenment changes our perspective and vision of the world. Enlightened Saints see the world as the energy of God, and utilize whatever comes their way in the service of God. They also see all human beings as parts of God and harbor a divine attitude toward everyone. Thus, Hanuman says:sīyā rāmamaya saba jaga jānī, karauñ pranāma jori juga pānī. (Ramayan)[v34]“I see the forms of Lord Ram and Mother Sita in everyone, and so I fold my hands and offer my respects to all.”
9 Help us with strength where spoil is won, O Indra: joined with the gbhus give us varied bounty.
Arjun realized that all the warriors on the battlefield ready to shed blood were none other than his own relatives, friends, and family. He was filled with remorse and fearful of performing his duty of fighting this war. The cause for these sentiments was his attachment towards his bodily relatives. He became forgetful of his spiritual existence, that he was not just the body. His affection for his bodily relatives had blinded his consciousness.In the materialistic concept, we consider ourselves to be only the body, which is emotionally attached to all its bodily relatives. As this attachment is based on ignorance it carries with it the physical burdens of life like pain, sorrow, grief, and death. Only the death of the physical body can end these materialistic attachments. We are more than just the physical body; our eternal souls are beyond life and death. Tangled in the various attachments of the material world, we keep forgetting that the Supreme Lord is our only permanent relative. He is the Father, Mother, Friend, Master, and Beloved of our soul.
But, when he lies upon the arm, the people see his unfading countenance before them.
5 Streams! the wise Gods have thrice three habitations. Child of three Mothers, he is Lord in synods.
6. To thy limbs, to thy belly, to thy tongue, to thy mouth, to thy teeth, to thy smell (nose), reverence be!
4 Thine are we, Indra, thine, both these who praise thee, and those who give rich gifts, O God and
14 Lord! Protect us from the west; Protect us from the east; Protect us from the north; Protect us from
7 His help hath made him cheerer in the battle, the folk have made him guardian of their comfort.
29 My praises when the Sun hath risen, my praises at the time of noon,
4. So bring thou hitherward to us, Indu, while thou art purified.
Incite them to bestow their wealth to aid our service of the Gods!
Manliness, Indra, is thy might: stay Vrtra, make the waters thine, lauding thine own imperial sway.
17. Order (rita), truth (satya), creative fervour (tapas), sovereignty, asceticism, law and works; past, future,
8. Prayers have been offered up-through love of glory: Vasishtha, honour Indra in the battle!
1 To this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught thou art invoked:
May we be his who pays thee, God, due honour. Ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.
1. NOW Mitra-Varuna shall be exalted high by your songs, noblest of all existing;
2 Indra, thou humbledst tribes that spake with insult by breaking down seven autumn forts, their refuge.
to the parched Earth. We ask you to instill in us the same magnanimity as you have, so that we get
which has no horns, small ears, is not one-eyed or lame, and has not seven hooves; verily he buys it with
6 For him they lenghten prayers and acts of worship: the Mothers weave garments for him their
4 Favour us Agni with his face of splendour, and Varuva and Mitra and the Asvins.
4 O Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge us:
3 Let Savitar the God he hymned with praises, to whom the Vasus, even, all sing glory.
6 He, like a mad weak warrior, challenged Indra, the great impetuous many-slaying Hero.
To him, Rjrasva, gave ye eyes, O Asvins; light to the blind ye sent for perfect vision.
6 May we enjoy Sarasvan's breast, all-beautiful, that swells with streams,
consecrated for thirteen nights; the year has thirteen months [1]; the Viraj is the year; he obtains the
Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, and the Floods, Adityas, Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the
having gained their cattle per formed their desires. He who knowing thus pays reverence to the fire
3. Lauded by Jamadagni's song, sit in the shrine of sacrifice:
places four (bricks) pointing east the metres are four; verily by the metres the sacrificer goes to the
2 Lord of Bay Horses, Hero, may the Soma rise to thy cheeks and jaws like mountain-ridges.
25 If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win your friendship made the laud accepted,
5 Now, praised, O Ancient King! fill thou the singer with plenteous food that he may deal forth
3 Charity to the needy is a good way of worshipping the Lord. It is a blessing and a privelege which is
14. As the wind and the fire consume the trees, the lords of the forest, thus, do thou consume my rivals, those
They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, talking, modulate the voice diversely.
1. STRONG Pusan's majesty is lauded evermore, the glory of his lordly might is never faint, his song of
8 And this heroic deed of might thou, Indra, also hast achieved,
2 The rich, the healer of disease, who giveth wealth, increaseth store,
1. INDU, to us for this great rite, bearing as 'twere thy wave to Gods,
a I have passed by some, I have not approached others.
44 Pour us a fount of meath, a spring of treasure; send us a hero son and happy fortune.
discriminations, to sever speech and preserve the sacrificer [2]. He makes a discrimination; verily he
3 Steer, Sea, Red Bird with strong wings, he hath entered the dwelling-place of the Primeval Father.
6 To you this freshening draught of Soma rusheth, O Maruts, like the voice of one who prayeth.
11 Guard us from hate Sarasvati, she who hath filled the realms of earth,
threefold is the beginning of the sacrifice; verily on the east he establishes the beginning of the sacrifice.
Aruna Aupaveçi used to say, 'At the morning pressing I establish the sacrifice and then I proceed with it
1. FIRST worship those who come at early morning: let the Twain drink before the giftless niggard.
from all these scriptures and from other sources (modern experience, ideas) into a single, unified holy
For thou with thy surpassing power smotest to death the guileful beast, lauding thine own imperial
For him dark-coloured streamed the shining udder: none made it swell for him. Thus Order willed it.
sacrifice belongs to the sacrificer, what is unsuccessful to his enemy. Now he, who comes to grief on the
Consume for ever all demons and sorcerers, consume thou each devouring fiend.
That Maghavan brings comfort in the foray to the religious man who pours libations.
and its covering; atmosphere with the pericardium; the mist with the flesh of the stomach; Indrani with
Wonderful, borne on paths of gold, drink ye the meath with Soma juice.
4 Mighty to prosper us wast thou born, and mighty is the strength thou hast.
2 The wealthy ones adorn thee, they who bring us horses as their gift:
Drink, Vajas, Rbhus! unto you is offered, to gladden you, the third and great libation.
hither their van: do thou, O Anumati, hold them in place after they have arrived!
28 When the red leader draws along their spotted deer yoked to the car.
2. He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his hands, fain to win light, car-borne, in forays for the kine.
6. We speak to Vâta (wind) and Parganya, to the atmosphere and the directions of space. And to all the regions
Eager to win the breathing and the breathless. All sang thy praise at banquet and oblation.
(he offers) to Indra of the Vairupa, verily he wins the brilliance of Savitr [2]; in that (he offers) to Indra
3 Great is, in truth, the number of the Mornings which were aforetime at the Sun's uprising.
1. With thy broad thunder,with the beacon, elevated by tile gods that pervade this all, with the lightning do thou not
5 A pleasant song to Agni we, sons of Rahugana, have sung:
first, he would offer these two (libations) in reverse order; he would waste away as the moon waned [3];
Whose bearns of splendour flash on high as though they sprang from heavenly seed.
8 At dawn of day, at night, Usas and Savitar, the Asvins, Bhaga, Agni's self:
Great art thou, matchless is thine Asura nature, who, high above, art kin to those beneath thee.
May you ride the imperishable chariot of happiness. May you grow in wisdom with the years.
serves) for the avoidance of passing over a limb of the sacrifice.
10 O Indra-Agni, who accept the laud, and hear us for our praise,
4 They with their might have stayed Heaven, Earth, and Prthivi, the Lord of Light, the firmament, -the
1. O AGNI, be our nearest Friend, be thou a kind deliverer and a gracious Friend.
18 Strong One! he marked them-and the Gods before them-like herds of cattle in a foodful pasture.
Like two laud-singing Brahmans in the assembly, like the folk's envoys called in many places.
wishes, 'May the higher sacrifice condescend to him, may he gain the world of heaven.' That is the place
9. These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of praise ascend to thee,
2. Haste to us, Lord of Bays; be not ungracious: visit us, lover of gold-hued oblation.
two Agnistomas the pupils; if [1] they were to employ the Agnistoma first, they would put the pupils
5 Give not us up a prey to sin, O Agni, the greedy enemy that brings us trouble;
of the forest', he bestows expiration and inspiration upon cattle. Of each he divides the divided pieces;
Obeying you as your appointed servant, Vasistha singing hath with lauds aroused you.
thou', (with these words) he pays reverence; verily he awakens him; therefore after sleeping creatures
2 Flashing like fire, be thou, O conquering Manyu, invoked, O Victor, as our army's leader.
1. I CALL your chariot to receive united praise mid princely men,
3 When for the strong, the rapturous joy he in this manner hath made room
Shree Krishna once again refers to the three modes of nature. In chapter 14, he had given an introduction about these modes, and described how they bind the soul to the samsara of life and death. Then in chapter 17, he went into great detail about how these three modes influence the kinds of faith people develop and also their choice of foods. He also explained the three categories of sacrifice, charity, and penance. Here, according to the three guṇas, the Lord will explain the three types of knowledge, action, and doers. Amongst the six systems of thought in Indian philosophy, the Sānkhya philosophy (also called puruṣh prakṛiti vāda) is recognized as the authority in the matter of analysis of material nature. It considers the soul as the puruṣh (lord), and thus recognizes many puruṣhas. Prakṛiti is the material nature and includes all things made from it. Sānkhya states the cause for misery is the desire of the puruṣh to enjoy prakṛiti. When this enjoying propensity subsides, then the puruṣh is released from the bondage of material nature attains eternal beatitude. The Sānkhya system does not acknowledge the existence of the Param Puruṣh, or the Supreme Lord, and hence it is insufficient for knowing the Absolute Truth. However, in the matter of knowledge about prakṛiti (material nature), Shree Krishna refers to it as the authority.
Ye, when ye bring to singer and the rite, enjoy the sacrifice periormed with holy praise and strength.
piling of the fire; verily the fire piles the fire, the Adhvaryu omits nothing from himself.
May Indra, Lord of Bay Steeds, fair-helmed Thunderer, act at his pleasure, as he lists.
6 Called straight to our oblations, come, O Agni, through our eulogies,
15. We speak to the five kingdoms of the plants with soma the most excellent among them. The darbha-grass,
The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays the Vrtras, wins and gathers riches.
23. He that refuses the sterile cow to him that knoweth thus, and gives her to others, difficult to dwell upon is for
Soma speeds onward like a youth to youtlitial maids, and gains the beaker by a course of bundred
May we in battle, in the days' assemblies,O Son of Strength, by riches conquer mortals.
Bright, active God, thou makest fame increase like means of nourishment.
these April (verses), with them from the head [3] he satisfied himself. In that there are these April
8. If a crow has injured her hair, as long as she is with her owner then do his children die: decline overtakes them
6. O gold-coloured, lovely, sun-coloured, most handsome (plant), mayest thou come to the fracture, O cure!
2 There with fiend's ways e'en Prsni was seated: with much laudation they exalted Indra.
2. Never, O Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate
Morning, midday, evening, were the times of Manu's drinking, the symbol of the sacrifice of cooked
Bestow a dwelling-place on our rich lords and me, and keep thy dart afar from these!
1. WHERE is that Hero? Who hath looked on Indra borne on light-rolling car by Tawny Coursers,
That was left over these worlds, Indra, the king, Indra, the overlord, Indra, the sovereign; thence he
7 War-loving Namuci thou smotest, robbing the Dasa of his magic for the Rsi.
5 Now for our band, O Maghavan, when lauded, make ample room with might, and grant us riches.
3. Eager to laud you, we with songs invoke you, bearing sacred food,
six; verily with the seasons he takes him; two have (the word) 'embracing', for the smiting away of the
The Vedic scriptures repeatedly describe God as an ocean of unlimited divine bliss:ānando brahmeti vyajānāt (Taittirīya Upaniṣhad 3.6)“Know God to be bliss.”kevalānubhavānanda svarūpaḥ parameśhvaraḥ (Bhagavatam 7.6.23)“God’s form is made of pure bliss.”ānanda mātra kara pāda mukhodarādi (Padma Purāṇ)“God’s hands, feet, face, stomach, etc. are all made of bliss.”jo ānand sindhu sukharāsī (Ramayan)“God is an ocean of bliss and happiness.”All these mantras and verses from the scriptures emphasize that divine bliss is the nature of God’s personality. The yogi, who absorbs the senses, mind, and intellect in God, begins to experience the infinite bliss of God who is seated within
He is cut off from the world of heaven who, being a sacrificer at new and full moon, the sacrifice either
Lords of all wealth, do ye, with guards which none may harm, preserve our dwelling free from foes.
The senses create sensations of pleasure in contact with the sense objects. The mind, which is like the sixth sense, derives pleasure from honor, praise, circumstances, success, etc. All these pleasures of body and mind are known as bhog (material enjoyment). Such worldly pleasures cannot satisfy the soul for the following reasons:Worldly pleasures are finite, and hence the feeling of deficiency remains inherent in them. One may feel happiness on becoming a millionaire, but the same millionaire becomes discontented on seeing a billionaire, and thinks, “If only I also had one billion, then I too would be happy.” In contrast, the bliss of God is infinite, and so it gives complete satisfaction.Worldly pleasures are temporary. Once they finish, they again leave one with the feeling of misery. For example, an alcoholic enjoys the pleasure of drinking alcohol at night, but the next morning, the hangover gives him a splitting headache. However, the bliss of God is eternal, and once attained, it remains forever.Worldly pleasures are insentient, and hence they continuously decrease. When people see a new Academy Award prize-winning movie, they are overjoyed, but if they have to see the movie a second time to give company to a friend, their joy dries up. And if a second friend insists that they see it a third time, they say, “Give me any punishment, but don’t ask me to see that movie again.” The pleasure from material objects keeps decreasing as we enjoy it. In Economics, this is defined as the Law of Diminishing Returns. But the bliss of God is sentient; it is sat-chit-ānand (eternal ever-fresh divine bliss). Hence, one can go on chanting the same divine Name of God all day long, and relish ever-new devotional satisfaction in it.No sane person enjoying a delicious dessert would be willing to give it up and eat mud instead. Similarly, when one begins to enjoy divine bliss, the mind loses all taste for material pleasures. Those endowed with the faculty of discrimination understand the above three drawbacks of material pleasures, and restrain their senses from them. Shree Krishna emphasizes this in the next verse.
this king be the pinnacle of royalty; subject to him, O Indra, every enemy!
therefore Pusan has pounded food for his share, for he has no teeth. The gods said of him, 'He has lost
b Thou art taken with a foundation; to Mahendra thee! This is thy birthplace; to Mahendra thee!
1. The first impulse of jealousy, moreover the one that comes after the first, the fire, the heart-burning, that do wc
For gain of waters, and of sons and grandsons, may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
thirty-six; the Brhati has thirty-six syllables, cattle are connected with the Brhati; verily by the Brhati he
the arms, force in the thighs, may all my members be uninjured; may thy body [2] be with my body;
2 Rise up, O Savitar whose hands are golden, and hear this man while sacrifice is offered,
8 These Brahmans with the Soma juice, performing their year-long rite, have lifted up their voices;
Earlier in the twentieth verse, Shree Krishna had stated that he is the beginning, middle, and end of all living beings. Now, he states the same for all creation, “All that is created, such as space, air, fire, water, and earth, is called sarga. I am the Creator (ādi), Maintainer (madhya), and Annihilator (anta) of these. Therefore, the processes of creation, maintenance, and dissolution can be meditated upon as my vibhūtis.”Vidyā is the education that a person acquires in relation to subjects of knowledge. The scriptures describe eighteen types of vidyās. Amongst them, fourteen are prominent:aṅgāni vedāśhchatvāro mīmānsā nyāya vistaraḥ purāṇaṁ dharmaśhāstraṁ cha vidyā hyetāśhchaturdaśhaāyurvedo dhanurvedo gāndharvaśhchaiva te trayaḥarthaśhāstraṁ chaturthaṁ tu vidyā hyaṣhṭādaśhaiva tāḥ(Viṣhṇu Purāṇ 3.6.27-28)[v29]“Śhikśhā, Kalp, Vyākaraṇ, Nirukti, Jyotiṣh, Chhanda—these are the six types of knowledge known as Vedāṅg (limbs of the Vedas). Ṛig, Yajur, Sāma, Atharva—these are the four branches of Vedic knowledge. Along with Mīmānsā, Nyāya, Dharma Śhāstra, and the Puranas, these comprise the fourteen chief vidyās.” Practice of these vidyās cultivates the intellect, deepens the knowledge, and increases awareness of the path of dharma. Additionally, the science of spirituality liberates human beings from material bondage and gives them immortality. Thus, it is superior to the previously mentioned vidyās. This is mentioned in the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam as well: sā vidyā tanmatiryayā (Verse 4.29.49)[v30] “The best knowledge is that by which the intellect becomes attached to the lotus feet of God.”In the field of argument and logic, jalpa means to find fault with the opponent’s statements, for the sake of establishing one’s own opinion. Vitaṇḍa means to avoid proper deliberation on the truth through evasion and frivolous arguments. Vāda is the logical conclusion of the discussion. Logic is the basis for communication of ideas and establishment of truths. It is because of a universal sense of logic that knowledge can be easily cultivated, taught, and learnt in human society. The universal principles of logic are a manifestation of the power of God.
new moon (night), Anumati the full moon (night), Dhatr the moon. The Vasus are eight [6], the Gayatri
conquered! Hail to these here, perdition to those yonder! Those yonder do I envelop in blue and red!
8 Urge ye the Conqueror to give, your Indra greatly to be praised,
12 They, the Dasagvas, first of all brought sacrifice: they at the break of mornings shall inspirit us.
pure invocations be accepted', he says; the pure (one) is food; verily he wins food. The gods and the
Indra, whose law the rivers follow as they flow,-him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
1. When thou, unequalled Maghavan, wast born to smite the Vritras dead,
And made him rich with kine and cars and horses. These things did Indra in the Soma's rapture.
2 The milk hath run to meet them like floods rushing down a precipice:
3 Him who is like a caldron shake: O Indu, shake thy gift to us
6 In the third region which distils a thousand streams, may the Exhaustless Ones descend with
10 First and preeminent, excelling all besides are the kind gifts of liberal Brhaspati.
2.2.6.12 Mantra 12: The Mantras of the Hotr at the sacrifice to the Pitrs
14 I spake to the Bay Coursers' Lord, to him who gives ability:
a (Thou art) Krttikas, the Naksatra, Agni, the deity; ye are the radiances of Agni, of Prajapati, of the
To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye praise, to these who bear ten car-poles, ten when they
2. Where the hostile weapon now rises against us, threatening to slay, there do we place the two arms of Indra
ghee, O sky and earth, be filled', (with these words) he sacrifices on the Udumbara (post); verily with
earth', he says; therefore Agni illuminates all the quarters. 'The Açvins removed death from him', he
20 Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing to the gain of riches,
8 Even as the bull drives on the herds, he drives the people with his might,
1. GLAD thee: thy glory hath been quaffed, Lord of Bay Steeds, as 'twere the bowl's enlivening mead.
be none there, then it should be pointed out by the Grhapati. At any rate it should be pointed out. They
by name art thou, O god of the yellow: do thou feel for us, and spare us, O takman!
9. The two dogs of Yama, the black and the brindled one, that guard the road (to heaven), that have been
1. Let songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race,
3 We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs and hymns,
with the year he cooks food for him. If he who piles the fire [5] should eat of what has not been
4 Aim and fetch boldly forth, O thou whose heart is bold: great glory will be thine thereby.
17 So with auspicious sheltering aid do ye, O Vasus, carry us
makes a hole with a Yajus, for discrimination. He makes it so great, of equal girth with Prajapati, the
banyan trees, by the Udumbara strength, by the Gayatri the metres, by the Trivrt the Stomas, by the
May the Field's Lord for us be full of sweetness, and may we follow after him uninjured.
The liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, and conquered those who, unprovoked, assailed them.
for as it were it is a buying-off of a man. Or rather they say, 'By Agni and Soma Indra slew Vrtra'. In
propagated'. They gave it to the Adityas, they bore it for twelve days, thereby they created three
deposited something with a superior one goes away. Whatever of the sacrifice is accompanied by a
Who cherishes Brhaspati well-tended, adorns and worships him as foremost sharer.
3 His chariot shall be glorious, sped by Gods, and mighty shall he be,
Ye Lords of splendour, wondrous, borne on paths of gold, drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law.
All to regard their different vocations, all moving creatures hath the Dawn awakened.
8 Bom, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the Light-finder make all blessings flow:
1. The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who runs his circling course with many round
9. For food, flow onward with thy stream, cleansed and made bright by sapient men: Indu. with sheen
b To Agni hail! Hail to Indra and Agni! Hail to Prajapati! Hail to the All-gods! Hail to all the deities!
He who desires cattle should offer an oblation to Indra; cattle are connected with Indra; verily he has
Dhṛiti (determination) is the inner strength of our mind and intellect to persevere on our path despite difficulties and obstacles. Dhṛiti is what keeps our vision focused toward the goal, and mobilizes the latent powers of the body, mind, and intellect to overcome apparently insurmountable impasses on the journey.Shree Krishna now moves on to describe the three kinds of determination. Through the practice of Yog, the mind becomes disciplined and develops the capacity to rule over the senses and the body. The steadfast willpower that develops when one learns to subdue the senses, discipline the life-airs, and control the mind is sāttvic dhṛiti (determination in the mode of goodness).
Come hither, bring us strength in many a varied form most near that it may succour us.
6 The wise sages know; and they tell us about the One unborn Lord who upholds the Universe.
1. The man who reads the essence stored by saints, the Pavamana hymns,
Wherewith, rich Dawns, ye seek with wealth Navagva, Dasagva Angira, the seven-toned singer?
They urge the Master of the house upon his way, and to the Eternal Pavamana pray for bliss.
They give delight, they spread abroad, they move themselves continually. Bring food to those who sing
mayst thou not perish for me, yonder, in yonder world', he says. Food perishes in yonder world, for
1. SAVITAR fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and made heaven stedfast where no prop supported.
Bring hither the celestial host and seat them here upon the sacred grass, and offer what they love.
Agni, with the consecration have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the observances have I obtained; thee, O
11. If (thy enemies) have made (offerings) to thy Fathers, or have called thy name at the sacrifice, may these
2.4.2.1 Mantra 1: The Placing of the Fire-pan on the Throne
She will not die, nor shall we die: his path is far: he whom Bay Horses bear hath turned thee to sweet
9 By worship, Pavamana! men have strengthened thee to prop the Law:
3 He filled the heaven and earth and all between them, Gods five times sevenfold in their proper
[1], the Anuçloka (Saman) behind; verily fame is their portion at the end of the sacrifice. The Adhvaryu
Beyond the two energies mentioned in the purport to the previous verse—Maya śhakti and Jīva śhakti—there is a third energy of God. This is called Yogmaya śhakti, which He refers to in this verse, as divine energy. Yogmaya is God’s all-powerful energy. It is called kartum-akartum-samarthaḥ, or “that which can make the impossible possible,” and is responsible for many of the amazing things we attribute to His personality. For example, God is seated in our hearts, yet we have no perception of Him. This is because His divine Yogmaya power keeps us aloof from Him.Similarly, God also keeps Himself aloof from the influence of Maya. In the Bhagavatam, the Vedas praise the Lord:vilajjamānayā yasya sthātumīkṣhā-pathe ’muyā (2.5.13)“Maya feels embarrassed to even stand before God.” Isn’t it a wonder that although God pervades Maya, the material energy, yet He is aloof from it? This is again by the mysterious power of Yogmaya.If the world could influence God, then when it decays or is destroyed, His nature and personality will also deteriorate. But despite all modifications in the world, God remains established in His personality. Accordingly, the Vedas call God by the name Daśhāṅgulī, or “ten fingers.” He is in the world, and yet ten fingers beyond it—untouched by it.
Agni the Asura shall sit as Herald, calling Gods hither for our great good fortune.
2 Full springs of fatness, Sovran Kings, Mitra. and Varuna, the Twain,
Soma hath risen in us, exceeding mighty, and we are come where men prolong existence.
4 Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused,
Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light, produceth forms that please us..
Human beings differ from each other in their natures, motivations, activities, professions, aspirations, and sanskārs (tendencies carrying forward from past lives). Shree Krishna brings Arjun to the understanding that sacrifices can take on hundreds of forms, but when they are dedicated to God, they become means of purification of the mind and senses and elevation of the soul. In this verse, he mentions three such yajñas that can be performed. Dravya yajña. There are those who are inclined toward earning wealth and donating it in charity toward a divine cause. Although they may engage in large and complicated business endeavors, yet their inner motivation remains to serve God with the wealth they earn. In this manner, they offer their propensity for earning money as sacrifice to God in devotion. John Wesley, the British preacher and founder of the Methodist Church would instruct his followers: “Make all you can. Save all you can. Give all you can.” Yog yajña. In Indian philosophy the Yog Darśhan is one of the six philosophical treatises written by six learned sages. Jaimini wrote “Mīmānsā Darśhan,” Ved Vyas wrote “Vedānt Darśhan,” Gautam wrote “Nyāya Darśhan,” Kanad wrote “Vaiśheṣhik Darśhan,” Kapil wrote “Sānkhya Darśhan,” and Patañjali wrote “Yog Darśhan.” The Patañjali Yog Darśhan describes an eight-fold path, called aṣhṭāṅg yog, for spiritual advancement, starting with physical techniques and ending in conquest of the mind. Some people find this path attractive and practice it as sacrifice. However, Patañjali Yog Darśhan clearly states: samādhisiddhirīśhvara praṇidhānāt (2.45)[v24] “To attain perfection in Yog, you must surrender to God.” So when persons inclined toward aṣhṭang yog learn to love God, they offer their yogic practice as yajña in the fire of devotion. An example of this is the yogic system “Jagadguru Kripaluji Yog,” where the physical postures of aṣhṭaṅg yog are practiced as yajña to God, along with the chanting of his divine names. Such a combination of yogic postures along with devotion results in the physical, mental, and spiritual purification of the practitioner. Jñāna yajña. Some persons are inclined toward the cultivation of knowledge. This propensity finds its perfect employment in the study of scriptures for enhancing one’s understanding and love for God. sā vidyā tanmatiryayā (Bhāgavatam 4.29.49)[v25] “True knowledge is that which increases our devotion to God.” Thus, studiously inclined sādhaks engage in the sacrifice of knowledge, which when imbued with the spirit of devotion, leads to loving union with God.
thus making the threefold bolt he hurls it at his foe, to lay him low. He should support (it) with
Indra, the Vrtra-slayer, urges eagerly the opening of the stall of kine:
The Ajas and the Sigrus and the Yaksus brought in to him as tribute heads of horses.
2 Where are ye, Asvins, in the evening, where at morn? Where is your haltingplace, where rest ye for
8. The gods, releasing the sun and the ritam (the divine order of the universe) from darkness and from Grâhi, did
Who presses out and pours his deep libations forth, O Vrtra-slayer, unto thee.
p Thou art the bird of fair feathers; go to the sky, fly to the heaven.
3. Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose habitation is the sea!
b May for me strength, instigation, influence, inclination, thought, inspiration, speech, fame, renown,
4. Burn, O Agni, after having been kindled by the firewood, bring skilfully hither the gods that are to be revered!
Bringing to us great store of high felicity, and bearning on our solemn rites.
4 Agni, the lofty flames of' thee enkindled have gone up on high,
c Let Prajapati place thee on the ridge of the sky, full of light, for every expiration, inspiration; support
When, fixing them apart, vast, most extensive, the Steer roars loudly in far-reaching courses.
ideas). In most cases, the Angirasa Muni translations (done in 1999) were more meaningful whereas
Oblation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by the names of Saprathas and Prathas.
1. THE mortal man whom ye, the Twain, Indra and Agni, help in fight,
6 Most Youthful God, he knoweth well thy favour who gave an impulse to this high devotion.
1. SONG-LOVER! like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma flows.
O men, bring forth the most propitious Agni, first ensign of the sacrifice to eastward.
12. Would someone teach me about the One Lord in whom the Earth, the skies, and the Heavens exist? And
As son be sets the name of mother and of sire in the far distance, in the third bright realm of heaven.
Devaka, Manyamana's son, thou slewest, and smotest Sambara from the lofty mountain.
5. Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside the flowing juice?
To Indra glorious in his name, the mighty one, even as the hymn alloweth it!
Ye who go in might against the king in his chariot,
11 Come hither with thine car inclined to hear, take pleasure in our lauds.
Seen are their lowest dwelling-places only, but they are in remote and secret regions.
with (life's) spirit this man shall be, sharing in the sun, in the world of immortality (amrita)!
water?' In that he joins with water [2] and all the deities are the waters, verily he unites him with the
9 Wide through the firmament spreads forth triumphant the far-resplendent strength of' thee the Mighty.
4.4.22 Sukta 22 – Charm to secure the superiority of a King
So Indra hath disclosed the food concealed, disclosed the doors, the food that lay concealed.
3. The Brahmans with their hymns exalting Indra increased his strength that he might slaughter Ahi.
(of the sacrificer) [1] anoints (them), for the wife is every one's friend, for friendship. The share of the
he pours seed; along the thigh he causes it to flow, for along the thigh is seed poured; baring the thigh he
Over these beings may I rule, may I be Sovran of the folk.
7 Strong is your swiftly moving steed, famed his exertion in the course
of the gods; he wins this conflict. Those two wipe (their sin) off upon him [1] who eats the food of two
Yoked by devotion, Indra, let the long-maned bays bring thee to drink the Soma juice!
3 They make their way to Indra and exalt him, bim whom no prayers and no laudations trouble;
hunger. He gave it to him; he accepted it, and (saying), 'Thrice hast thou furthered me', gave it to Visnu.
19. The house built with pious word, built by seers, erected--may Indra and Agni, the two immortals, protect the
to go openly. Uttering the discrimination he makes the Vasat cry with the foresacrifice; verily he leaves
i Thou art the ocean, full of mist, granting moisture, blow over me with healing, with wonder-working;
Ye, Lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard: may we as welcome friends reach Aryaman's
5 Come to us, Indra, come thou highly lauded to the devotions of the singer Mana.
8 Pressed is the gladdening stalk as 'twere a river: so let the rite, the toiler's power, attract thee
says, for to Indra he gave it; 'to him thee! To Visnu thee!' he says; in that Visnu supported him (saying),
5. (The god) that has caused (disease) shall perform the cure; he is himself the best physician.
5 Abundant are the gifts he gives to mortals: for him the earth bears a rich store of treasures.
One of the Pair beholdeth all existing things; the other ordereth seasons and is born again.
8 Our songs of praise have glorified Indra who ruleth by his might,
20. Swords of good brass are in our house: we know how many joints thou hast, O spell! Be sure to rise, go away
29 He also snorts, by whom encompassed round the Cow laws as she clings unto the shedder of the
He springs to life each month, each day that passes; so Gods have made him their oblation-bearer.
Blaze up on high and ever make us richer. Give us great wealth, O thou whose boons are many.
Indra in rapturous joy shook down their castles he slew them in his might, the Thunder-wielder.
I praise their Company that merits worship as the good Martits' priest to pay them honour.
atmosphere, a third in the sky, for he was afraid of his growth. By means of the third on earth Indra
Ask them to. tell thee what the floods are saying, what girdling rock the waters burst asunder.
4. With (the aid of) thrice eighty siman-singers, with (the aid of) the Âdityas, Vasus, and Angiras--may our father's
2 Come to the sacrifice, O ye whose ways are right, whose laws are true,
4 Ye made Cyavana, weak and worn with length of days, young again, like a car, that he had power to
14 Ye from the wolf's jaws, as ye stood together, set free the quail, O Heroes, O Nasatyas.
f In unison with the seasons, in unison with the ordainers, in unison with the Vasus, in unison with the
make the same offering; in that he offers to Agni, the purifying, he thereby bestows breath upon him; in
19 O Asvins, with that glorious fame come hither, through our brilliant song,
3 As such, like Angiras we call on thee best winner of the spoil:
Visnu; verily he supports the deities and the sacrifice. He sacrifices muttering, for pairing. The
forehead; in the summer at midday [1] three with white backs; in the autumn in the afternoon three with
appeased. 'O Agnidh, sit on the lap of the Nestr; O Nestr, lead up the wife', he says verily the Agnidh
16 O Indra him who lay at length staying thy copious waters thou,
winnowing-basket, that has been grown by the rain: the spelt and the chaff it shall sift out!
8 Wide and aloft thou spreadest thee, O Agni, with tby brilliant flame.
Thou hast, with speeders, with Dasagvas, Indra, Sakra, with thunder rent obstructive Vala.
And will not his more plentiful benevolence come to us with abundant strength?
5. Time begot yonder heaven, Time also (begot) these earths. That which was, and that which shall be, urged
To Trita, and to Dvita, Dawn! bear thou the evil dream away.
6. Adhvaryu, let the Soma flow, for Indra longs to drink thereof.
1. The tawny Bull hath bellowed, fair as mighty Mitra to behold: he gleams and flashes with the Sun.
7 He knows the path of birds that fly through heaven, and, Sovran of the sea,
lower; this is the grave fashion; he for whom he sets it up thus swiftly dies. For him who desires the
seasons made Prajapati sacrifice with it, and in them because of it he prospered. He prospers among the
58. He, O god Sûrya, that to-day passes between thee and me, upon him our evil dream, our foulness, and our
6 Beholding, as it were, Two Mother Cows, the Steer goes roaring on his way even as the Maruts roar.
3 Here on their path the noble Gods proceeded: in the wide firmament the Beauteous decked them.
1. THIS pleasant meath, O Indra, is effused for thee: thou art the ruling Lord of beaker and of juice.
2 Even here is Indra famed, and among us this day the glorious Thunderer is praised,
8. Ne'er art thou fruitless, Indra, ne'er dost thou desert the worshipper:
recognize the world of heaven. He lets her go to the west; the thousand follow after her. She knowing
Saman or Yajus, is loose; whatever by a Rc is firm; they are drawn with a support in front to the
These draughts approach you as the day is closing, as cows, whose calves are newly-born, their
6 Like rivers our libations flow together, cleansing themselves in inmost heart and spirit.
1. Drink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee, with our milky draught!
20 Killing the foeman and his hate, and winning booty every day,
The Gods came near, obedient to thy sunimons, and thus attained their rank as chief Protectors.
10 When he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven and its most lofty mansions,
2 Come, Indra, to this gladdening drink, placed on the grass, pressed out with stones:
neither domesticated nor wild animals. The Angirases going to the world of heaven [2] spilled the
where thou hast arrived, O plant, there there is no fear.
6 Amid brown plants he stoops as if adorning them, and rushes bellowing like a bull upon his wives.
4. The fire of the plants, and the essence of the bulls shall arouse him! Do thou, O Indra, controller of
the blazing, a cake on eight potsherds, to Surya an oblation, to Agni, the blazing, a cake on eight
6. In perfect unison have all your longing hymns that find the light of heaven sounded forth Indra's
3. Together with the body of the mortal, from his birth, one and a hundred marks are born. Those that are most
Urging thy might, with these fair lauds they seek thee, O theme of song, as horses rush tobattle.
2. According to primeval plan this poet hath been strengthened by,
2. He, flows beholding on his way all well-beloved sacred lore,
3. What laws we have infringed upon, with the eye, the mind, and speech, either while awake, or asleep-may
7. I stiffen thy pasas as a bowstring upon the bow. Embrace thou (women) as the antelope buck the
invite him, (saying), 'Thou hast slain my son.' He made a disturbance of the sacrifice, and forcibly drank
They bear unmoved the cursing of the people, for all our wisdom comes from thee, O Indra.
8 They turn thee not another way, when, lauded, Lover of the Song,
Him these our songs of praise, him, Agni, we extol: his powers shine out preeminent.
5 With holy thoughts the pious have thrown open Doors fain for chariots in the Gods' assembly.
antelope skin is the form of holy power; he puts on a pair of black sandals; verily by the holy power he
27. Those that have flowers, those that have blossoms, those that bear fruit, and those that are without fruit, as if
4.6.132Sukta 132 – Charm to arouse the passionate love of a Man
4 When Varuna is fain for milk he moistens the sky, the land, and earth to her foundation.
leaves', he says; therefore plants produce fruit. 'This germ of yours, of due season, hath sat him in his
14 In the wild joy of this hath Indra, knowing full many a form, struck down resistless Vrtras.
he makes him wax. The Puronuvakya is, 'He is born ever new'; verily thereby he bestows life upon him.
then he conquered these worlds. One who is engaged in a struggle should offer a dwarf (beast) to Visnu;
k With eyes on every side, with a face on every side,
Then may our holy songs go forward on their way, our songs as 'twere unto the Gods.
2 Like fire with flashing flame, breast-bound with chains of gold, like tempest-blasts, self-moving, swift
3. O Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine:
[3]. Let us not be overcome by that.' He replied, 'From pruning shall more (shoots) spring up for you.'
Brhaspati, may we be lords of riches, with noble progeny and store of heroes.
Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly strength to him who craves it.
For him the Cow, noble and far-extending, poured pleasant juices, bringing oil and sweetness.
desires) from him. He gave to the spring the sap [1], to the hot season barley, to the rains plants, to
3. May this one be the treasure-lord of riches, may this king be the tribal lord of the Vis (the people)! Upon this
10. Whether thou art derived from the (mountain) Trikakud, or art said to come from the (river) Yamunâ, both
5. This great healer of wounds has been gotten out of the earth: that is the cure for discharges, and
2. He, excellent, withholdeth not his bounteous gift of wealth in kine.
Delight us with thy bounty rich in pleasantness, O Indra, with abundant wealth.
10. O Indu, bring us wealth in steeds brilliant and quickening all life;
Gandharva, in the rush of the wind, food that is praised.
3 When with loud cry from heaven down sped the Falcon, thence hasting like the wind he bore the Bold
1. O Agni, come into being! Aditi here in her throes, longing for sons, is cooking the porridge for the Brahmans,
5. Him whom I implore with Vâk Sarasvatî (the goddess-of speech), the yoke-fellow of thought, faith shall find today, bestowed by the brown soma!
the (cups) for the Maruts, the (cup) for Mahendra, the (cup) for Aditya, the (cup) for Savitr the (cup) for
9 Waxed strong in might at dawn he tore the Sun's wheel off. Bright red, he steals away their speech,
6 So mighty thou protectest us from slander, O Champion, Agni! with all fires enkindled.
16 Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose home is in the sea17 Soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for Indra with his Marut host:
Let him who knows all rules invite for worship, Agru announce our offering to the Immortals.
A man call Agni to protect when sacrifice is well prepared.
by himself; 'from hostility brought about by others', he says, for the Raksases are brought about by
4 This one great power of thine our eyes have witnessed, wherewith thou slewest Varasikha's children,
3 Covered with gold, meath-tinted, dropping fatness, your chariot with its freight of food comes hither,
4 Agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero, and sent the sage who wins a thousand cattle.
24 Make ye our speech effectual, O ye Asvins, and this our hymn, ye mighty Wonder-Workers.
sniffs the calf on birth. The Agrayana is the self of the sacrifice; at each pressing he draws it; verily he
Saranyu brought to him the Asvin brothers, and then deserted both twinned pairs of children.
b That disease of yours, O Indra and Varuna, that is in the fire, that of yours I appease hereby; that
For their sake, Lords of splendour! aid the pious man who, unbewildered, keeps you ever in his
does not put (the cup) down, for from what is not depressed offspring are produced. He does not utter
unites within the Vedi, for accomplishment. When the Yatis were being eaten, their heads fell away;
[1]; verily in each need he yokes him; 'in each contest we invoke', he says; the contest is food; verily he
4 Thee, too, hath Bharata of old, with mighty men, implored for bliss.
At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath screamed.
2 What God hath seen me? Who of all their number clearly beheld my forms in many places?
Not by our brethren was our food discovered: find with the Gods care for us, thou who knowest.
m May the sun in the east protect thee from all evil.
g Thou art a support, make the quarters firm, make the organ firm, make offspring firm, make his
12 1, greatest of the Mighty Ones, am lifted to the firmament:
Even those vigorous Steeds, fleet-footed in the course, with those come quickly near to us.
4 Spread thyself out, thou soft as wool The holy hymns have sung to thee.
12 Thus have we sung anew to Indra-Agni, as sang our sires, Angirases, and Mandhatar.
wins food by the Viraj. 'Ye are savoury, conquerors of Vrtra', he says; this is the Soma-drinking of the
1. FROM near or far away may mighty Indra giver of succour, come for our protection
As great streams fill the river so our song of praise fill thee, and make thee yet more mighty in thy
4. Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indu Pavamana roared,
May the abundant juices bear you onward to power and strength, and, when imbibed, delight you.
That efficacious power that comes from lofty heaven, ye bind unto the work, as to the pole an ox.
10 Like swans, prepare a song of praise with pressing-stones, glad in your hymns with juice poured
(with these words he puts down) on the west; the twenty-seven fold is these worlds; verily he finds
Ye caused the brood of Brsaya to perish; ye found the light, the single light for many.
He, Lord of Tawny Coursers, Lord of fleet-foot Mares, will bear his Bay Steeds safely over all distress.
7 Vaisvanara, dwelling by his might with all men, far-shining, holy mid the Bharadvajas,
2. Steer-strong thy might is like a steer's, steer-strong the wood, steer-strong the juice:
42 Make Vayu glad,, for furtherance and bounty: cheer Varuna and Mitra, as they cleanse thee.
Indra, thou blewest the great Dragon from the air -. men must regard that valorous deed.
Their good gifts sought of men are ranged in order due, and various in their form move for the Lord who
6 To the Assembly's wondrous Lord, to Indra's lovely Friend who gives
1. To you will I sing Indra's praise who gives good gifts, as we I we know;
full; verily he eats food that fails not. The man accords a thousand of cattle, the other animals a
To Visnu thee! This is thy birthplace; to Indra, eager for praise, thee!
Him fair to see, of goodly aspect, mighty, men's messenger who carries their oblations.
All acts of mine shall they accept with pleasure, laudation from the singer who presents it.
is enclosed, the evil spirits are enclosed', he says, for the smiting away of the Raksases [3]. 'Thus I cut
fourteen nights away for them. The Adityas mounted the world of heaven with the Prsthas; they
6 We in our homes, ye Baunteous Ones, and while we journey on the road,
Along with Vetasu thou slewest Tugra, and madest Tuji strong, who praised thee, Indra.
Come to this sacrifice of ours, O Victor replenish all thy powers with this libation.
7 For verily we truthful singers praise you the niggard trafficker is here excluded.
4 Let the sweet drops descend on us, O Indra: give us enough to lade a thousand wagons.
3 The Maruts, praised by us, shall show us favour; Maghavan, lauded, shall be most propitious.
Accept, as men accept a true-born infant, my laud, O Agni nobly born in body.
17 What time the Bull bellows in other regions, another herd receives the genial moisture;
strew. Agni said, 'Let me have a share; then this will be yours.' They replied, 'The re-establishing shall
And Pavamana, like the shout of combatants, the drop rising in sweet juice, is flowing through the
With whom to fair lands we may cross the waters, and dwell in our own home with you beside us.
shall be summoned, O Indra and Agni', he says; verily he wins might and force. 'This is thy due place of
5. Thy opponents shall call thee; thy friends have chosen. thee! Indra, Agni, and all the gods have kept prosperity
Fed with the holy oil, vouchsafe us riches ye are the lake, the vat that holds the Soma.
6 On every side, O Soma, flow round us with thy protecting stream,
3 Nasatyas, Pusans, ye as Gods for glory arranged and set in order Surya's bridal.
juice waits for Mitra and for Varuna to drink, fair juice for drink, for sacrihce.
abysmal, the fourth the strong, the fifth the desirable; if he were not to offer libations to them they would
4.3.5 Sukta 5 – Praise of an Amulet derived from the Parna Tree, designed to strengthen
these bricks, they put them down; 'Thou art the furtherer', (with these words) they became multiplied
Prajapati; (verily it serves) for the production of offspring. He causes water to follow along; verily thus
last; verily he confers on the metres the glory of the sacrifice. If he desire, 'May I confer on the sacrificer
of cattle. 'The wives of the gods, Agni, the lord of the house, are the pair of the sacrifice; by sacrifice to
The ocean modifies itself in many forms such as the wave, froth, tide, ripples, etc. One who is shown all these individually for the first time may conclude that they are all different. But one who has knowledge of the ocean sees the inherent unity in all the variety. Similarly, there are numerous forms of life in existence, from the tiniest amoeba to the most powerful celestial gods. All of them are rooted in the same reality—the soul, which is a part of God, seated in a body, which is made from the material energy. The distinctions between the forms are not due to the soul, but due to the different bodies manifested by the material energy. Upon birth, the bodies of all living beings are created from the material energy, and at death, their bodies again merge into it. When we see the variety of living beings all rooted in the same material nature, we realize the unity behind the diversity. And since material nature is the energy of God, such an understanding makes us see the same spiritual substratum pervading all existence. This leads to the Brahman realization.
Him the black undulating cloud bedeweth, in this mid-air's depth, at the base of darkness,
6. The amulet which Brihaspati tied, the ploughshare dripping with ghee, the strong khadira, unto strength, that
Grown great through strengthening gifts at each libation, he hath become renowned by mighty exploits.
injury to it, for one hurts not oneself. 'May the wives of the gods thee', he says; the wives of the gods
5 O Asuniti, keep the soul within us, and make the days we have to live yet longer.
eleven potsherds to Indra, of the Arka and the Açvamedha; the Arka and the Açvamedha are the two end
With light celestial in Atharvan's manner burn up the foot who ruins truth with falsehood.
For I am known as terrible, O Maruts I, Indra, am the Lord of what I ruined.
Pusan said, 'With this do thou go before me; then shall cattle resort to thee.' 'Do thou go before me', said
3 Whose blaze most splendid, sovran in the forest, shines waxing on his way like the - Impeller.
2.1.7.4 Mantra 4: The Offerings to the Gods and the Brahmans
5 Clothing thern in his hues, the kine of him the Leader wait on him.
9 Set us on widest chariot-seat, O Indra, with two steeds best to draw, O Lord of Hundreds!
Those who still aim their hostile darts to smite us, turn them to flight, O Indra, crush and kill them.
c Ye are missiles by name; your houses are in the east; your arrows are Agni; the water, &c.
1.2.42 Mantra 42 – Kapinjala (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
Brhaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked, averting shame from one another.
7 With joy, O Indra, Lord of Tawny Coursers, the Sisters then, these Goddesses, extolled thee,
2. All round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as 'twere a never-failing well for men to drink,
4. Indu, pour out abundant food with store of cattle and of gold,
make me go to a secure place, with offspring and cattle, let wealth again visit me', (he says); verily she
2 Even as a youngling crying to his mothers, the bounteous Steer hath flowed along to waters.
Then the Calf lowed, and looked upon the Mother, the Cow who wears all shapes in three directions.
8 For Indra, Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press the Soma juice.
unites him with the thought for which he lifts him up. 'May the five regions divine aid the sacrifice, the
9 Come, Maghavan, Friend of Man, to aid the singer imploring thee in battle for the sunlight.
1. Agni, our skilful vanguard, shall attack, burning, against their schemes and hostile plans! Gâtavedas shall
the light in the east; therefore we revere the light in the east. The metres ran a race for the cattle; the
3 Agni, when, born thou lookedst on all creatures, like a brisk herdsman moving round his cattle.
O King, we save from death the man whose cure a Brahman undertakes.
5 This song Visvavasu shall sing us, meter of air's mid-realm celestial Gandharva,
The section of this verse—neither rejoicing in pleasure, nor lamenting the unpleasant—is the highest ideal of the Vipassanā tradition of meditation in Buddhism. Rigorous training is undertaken to reach this state of clarity and precision, ultimately leading to equanimity, and destruction of self-will. However, the same state is naturally reached in devotion to God, when we surrender our will to the divine. In accordance with verse 5.17, when we unite our will to the will of God, then both pleasure and pain are serenely accepted as His grace.A beautiful story illustrates this attitude. A wild horse once ran into a farm. People congratulated the farmer on his good luck. He said, “Good luck, bad luck, who knows? It is all the will of God.” A few days later, the horse ran away, back into the forest. His neighbors commiserated with his bad luck. He said, “Bad luck, good luck, who knows? It is all God’s will.” A few more days went by, and the horse returned with twenty more wild horses. Again people congratulated the farmer on his stroke of good luck. He wisely reflected, “What is good and bad luck? This is all God’s will.” A few days later, the farmer’s son broke his leg while riding one of the horses. The neighbors came to express grief. The wise farmer responded, “Pleasant and unpleasant, it is only God’s will.” Some more days went by, and the king’s soldiers came to recruit all young men into the army for the war that had just broken out. All the young men in the neighborhood were taken into the army, but the farmer’s son was left behind because his leg was broken.Divine knowledge brings the understanding that our self-interest lies in giving pleasure to God. This leads to surrender to the will of God, and when the self-will gets merged in the divine will, one develops the equanimity to serenely accept both pleasure and pain as His grace. This is the symptom of a person situated in transcendence.
Even Soma, Lord of opulence, the friend of Indra, day by day.
verily he has recourse to Brahmanaspati with his own share; verily he subjects his fellows to him; he
f Thou are supporting, make the heaven firm, make the eye [1] firm, make the ear firm, make his
9. When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend the song:
Father and Mother, sweetof speech, fairhanded, may they, far-famed, in every fight protect us.
For him, like loving friends, the Maruts bringing bliss bedew the regions round with milk abundantly.
These speak of truth, praising the truth eternal, thinking on Order as the guards of Order.
Rohita the gods resort with glad mind: he shall cause me to rise through elevation derived from the assembly!
is Agni Vaiçvanara, Vaiçvanara, is the form dear to Agni; verily he establishes it in his dear form. He
5 To him three Dames are oftering food to feed him, Goddesses to the God whom none may injure.
18 Of all the many Plants whose King is, Soma, Plants of hundred forms,
Having described the two kinds of natures, Shree Krishna now declares the consequences of both. He says that the demoniac qualities keep one fettered to the samsara of life and death, while the cultivation of saintly virtues helps one break through the bondage of Maya. To tread the spiritual path successfully and pursue it till the end, a sādhak (aspirant) needs to watch out for many things. If even one of the demoniac qualities, such as arrogance, hypocrisy, etc. remains in the personality, it can become the cause of failure. Simultaneously, the divine virtues need to be developed, for without the saintly qualities, our spiritual progress can again become crippled. For example, without fortitude, we will give up the journey when the going becomes difficult; without forgiveness, the mind will be tied down to hatred and not have the ability to be absorbed in God. But if we possess the saintly virtues that Shree Krishna mentions, then our ability to progress rapidly and cope with the obstacles on the path increases. Thus, developing good qualities and eliminating the bad ones is an integral part of spiritual practice. A useful technique that helps us work on removing our weaknesses and developing virtues is the maintenance of a personal diary. Many successful persons kept memoirs and diaries to help them develop the virtues they felt were necessary for success. Mahatma Gandhi and Benjamin Franklin both mention having used such techniques in their autobiographies. Some may argue that if we develop devotion to God, we will naturally, over time, acquire the saintly virtues described by Shree Krishna. That is indeed true, but it is unlikely that we will start out on the path full of devotion from the outset itself, free all the negative traits, any one of which can dramatically interfere with devotional progress. Most people need to slowly develop bhakti through practice, and success in practice will come by possessing saintly qualities and eliminating demoniac ones. Hence, as a part of our efforts in devotion, we must also keep working on ourselves to develop the divine qualities that Shree Krishna has mentioned in this chapter and shed any demoniac ones.
Like water, gracious Lord! were my libations made, like milch-kine to the worshipper.
8 May both Worlds bless Subandhu, young Mothers of everlasting Law.
1. BE pleased with this our offering, thou who art the Lord; we will adore thee with this new and mighty
f (Thou art) the Yavas, the Ayavas, the courses, the helpers, the Sabda, the ocean, the firm one.
The Rg Veda is made up of 10 Mandala and there were 10 priestly families who wrote this scripture as
Licking as 'twere their calf the pair of Mothers flow onward to their common home together.
i Be extended wide, let the lord of the sacrifice be extended wide.
17 We keep the old accustomed laws, the statutes of supremacy,
4 Malignities stay not from wealth the mortal man whom, Agni, thou
Those, Indra, who increase the lordly power, the firm heroic strength of thee the Giver.
12, The amulet which Brihaspati tied for swift Vâta, with that amulet, O Asvins, do ye guard this plough-land; that
Gayatri, and therefore on the opening day (the cup) for Indra and Vayu is drawn; verily he draws it in its
In the name of spirituality, people perform senseless austerities. Some lie on beds of thorns or drive spikes through their bodies as a part of macabre rituals for dominion over material existence. Others keep one hand raised for years, as a procedure they believe will help them gain mystic abilities. Some gaze constantly at the sun, unmindful of the harm it does to their eyes. Others undertake long fasts, withering their body away for imagined material gains. Shree Krishna says: “O Arjun, you asked me about the status of those who disregard the injunctions of the scriptures and yet worship with faith. I am telling you that faith is visible even in people who perform severe austerities, but it is bereft of a proper basis of knowledge. Such people do possess deep conviction in the efficacy of their practices, but their faith is in the mode of ignorance. Those who abuse and torture their own physical body disrespect the Supreme Soul who resides within. All these are contrary to the recommended path of the scriptures.” Having described the three categories of faith, Shree Krishna now explains, corresponding to each of these, the categories of food, activities, sacrifice, charity, and so forth.
To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to us-word.
the white-browed, these are for Indra and Visnu; the three white-flecked barren cows are for
18. Success, might, plans, dominion, sovereignty, the six broad (regions), the year, libation (idâ), the orders to the
1. Him here, the offspring of the sea, the ten swift fingers beautify:
'O Agni, strength and fame are thine', (with these words) he scatters sand; that is the hymn of Agni
For prayer and songs in him are concentrated: let laud wax mighty when addressed to Indra:
2. We, sacrificing, call on the best worshipper thee eldest of Angirasas, singer! with hyrnns, thee,
Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men's generations magnify with praise-songs.
1. TASTE this strong draught enriched with offered viands: with all thy chariot here unyoke thy
Thou by the worshipper layest thy precious store: thou art sole Lord of all. Meet for our praise art thou.
Çukra is drawn on this (day); therefore the Agrayana is drawn on the eighth day, the abode of the Çukra.
Soma, effused, is purified and lauded: our hymns and Trishtup songs unite in Soma.
becomes fit for offspring along with them; these worlds become fit for him [1], and strength he places in
11 Whether ye be in heaven, O Indra-Agni, on earth, on mountains, in the herbs, or waters,
He in whose energy wise Pusan marches, surveying all existence like a herdsman.
1. Impetuous, bright, have they come forth, unwearied in their speed, like bulls,
8 Here flows Asmanvati: hold fast each other, keep yourselves up, and pass, my friends, the river.
a On the instigation of god Savitr, I take thee with the arms of the Açvins, with the hands of Pusan.
9 As such, O longed-far Asvins, lead us on to wealth of varied sort,
13 The wise and holy Deities engendered Agni Vaisvanara whom age ne'er touches.
5 Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new bymn, thou Giver of all bounties.
7 O men! You do not know the Supreme Lord who has created all the stars and the planets, and all the
Old age impairs the beauty of our bodies. Let husbands still come near unto their spouses.
With milk and waters is he decked when pressed with stones: Indu, when purified, shall find sweet rest
3. The neuralgia that is in the limbs, that is in the ears and in the eyes-we tear them out, the neuralgia, the
What happens when one attains God? Once God-realized the soul is liberated from the cycle of life and death, it reaches the divine abode of God and remains there forever. It does not take birth in the material world again and suffer its miseries. Life in the material world from birth till death is full of suffering.The struggle starts inside the mother’s womb itself, where we hang upside down for nine months. Then we go through a painful process of taking birth and delivered into an unknown world, where we have to cry for our every need. As we grow, we need to learn to speak, eat, walk, etc. Then comes the turmoil of adolescence, which is a mentally challenging phase. As adults, marriage and relationships test our endurance and patience to accept and accommodate individualities. We struggle to maintain social responsibilities. Then comes old age with its gifts of sickness and disease. All through our life, we suffer from pain and miseries; induced by our own body, mind, people, or circumstances around us. Then finally, we die, which is again an extremely painful experience.But why does God put us through so much pain and misery? In God’s grand design, the purpose of these miseries is to realize that the material realm is not the permanent abode for the soul. It serves as a correction home for the souls who have forgotten God and are trapped in the material world. These sufferings and miseries help the souls develop the desire for God. Consider an example of a person who accidentally puts his hand on burning coal. Immediately, due to the burning sensation and pain he experiences, he withdraws his hand.What really happened here? When the man touched hot coal, his skin started burning, and the neurons on his skin sent a message to the brain of the pain he experienced. The brain immediately sends commands to his hand muscles that remove his hand to avoid further burning and pain. Therefore, pain is a signal that something is not right and needs correction. Similarly, the pain and miseries that we experience in the material world; are stimulation for us to shun our defective consciousness. These inspire and motivate the lost souls to tread toward their ultimate goal of union with God.Those worthy souls who commit themselves in exclusive devotion attain God and reach His Divine Abode. However, those souls who remain engrossed in material affluence and forget God continue to rotate in the cycle of birth and death. Eventually, we get what we make ourselves worthy of and the endeavours we choose to undertake.
1. How, Agni, have the radiant ones, aspiring, endued thee with the vigour of the living,
12 Strong God, the riches which thy hands have holden from days of old have perished not nor wasted.
Praised God! the glad priest brings his heart's devotion; the holy youth presents twofold oblation.
In thy right hand hold fast thy bolt of thunder, and weaken, Bounteous Lord, his art and magic.
6 Dirghatamas the son of Mamati hath come to length of days in the tenth age of human kind.
Thou hast chastised, O Indra, Lord of Strength, the man who worships not,
May the great ones, the Çakvari (verses), with favouring winds [8]
As thou, O mightier yet. didst shine for Satyatravas, Vayya's son, high-born! delightful with thy steeds!
6 And may the Maruts, praised by all their titles, Heroes, enjoy the taste of our oblations.
he desire of a man, 'May he be rich in cattle' [2], he should measure for him on the hairy side. That
shaped like the wooden sword; the wooden sword is a thunderbolt; verily he hurls a thunderbolt against
3 To his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and welcomed eagerly the prayers he offered.
5 Rich in oblations! robed in cloud, thou corapassest oblation, sacrifice, the mighty seat of Gods.
u Thou art the right, thou art the seat of right, thou art the glory of right.
2 O thou who castest forth the stones crushing the sorceresses' heads,
plants the fifth; for the year the sixth; for the Maruts the seventh; for Brhaspati the eighth; for Mitra the
offer the Agnihotra. They performed the full moon rite, as the animal sacrifice to Agni and Soma [2].
19 Manu hath stablished thee a light, Agni, for all the race of men:
Shree Krishna emphasizes the practice of celibacy for success in meditation. The sexual desire facilitates the process of procreation in the animal kingdom, and animals indulge in it primarily for that purpose. In most species, there is a particular mating season; animals do not indulge in sexual activity wantonly. Since humans have greater intellects and the freedom to indulge at will, the activity of procreation is converted into a means of licentious enjoyment. However, the Vedic scriptures lay great emphasis on practicing celibacy. Maharshi Patanjali states:brahmacharya pratiṣhṭhāyāṁ vīrya lābhaḥ (Yog Sūtras 2.38)[v9]“The practice of celibacy leads to great enhancement of energy.”Ayurveda, the Indian science of medicine extolls brahmacharya (the practice of celibacy) for its exceptional health benefits. One of the students of Dhanvantari approached his teacher after finishing his full course of Ayurveda (the ancient Indian science of medicine), and asked: “O Sage, now kindly let me know the secret of health.” Dhanvantari replied: “This seminal energy is verily the ātman. The secret of health lies in preservation of this vital force. He who wastes this vital and precious energy cannot have physical, mental, moral, and spiritual development.” According to Ayurveda, forty drops of blood go into making one drop of semen. Those who waste their semen develop unsteady and agitated prāṇ. They lose their physical and mental energy, and weaken their memory, mind, and intellect. The practice of celibacy leads to a boost of bodily energy, clarity of intellect, gigantic will power, retentive memory, and a keen spiritual intellect. It creates a sparkle in the eyes and a luster on the cheeks.The definition of celibacy is not restricted to mere abstinence from physical indulgence. The Agni Purāṇ states that the eightfold activities related to sex must be controlled: 1) Thinking about it. 2) Talking about it. 3) Joking about it. 4) Envisioning it. 5) Desiring it. 6) Wooing to get someone interested in it. 7) Enticing someone interested in it. 8) Engaging in it. For one to be considered celibate, all these must be shunned. Thus, celibacy not only requires abstinence from sexual intercourse, but also refrainment from masturbation, homosexual acts, and all other sexual practices.Further, Shree Krishna states here that the object of meditation should be God alone. This point is again reiterated in the next verse.
Not slaying men, unconquered Hero with the brave, O Hero, with the thrice-seven brave.
worn-out skins. With the verses of the queen of serpents he establishes the Garhapatya, and so renewing
First, Hero in the fight, he seeks the cattle, and with his eye the Steer is our protector.
2. For unto thee, O Angiras, O Son of Strength, move ladles in the sacrifice.
7 His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses move, whose smoke is shining,
Thou ever wast the Treasure-Lord of treasures: Indra, thou lettest all folk share thy bounty.
5 Born noble in the regions, aim of all mens' eyes to be implored for life by great and small alike,
4 Thou with thy greatness hast filled full, O Indra, even both the worlds with might, O thou Most Mighty.
That, like a hawk affrighted through the regions, thou crossedst nine-and-ninety flowing rivers?
Thou art enkindled as the best of Seers. Help thou the sacrifice.
26 Lord, Give power to his speech and grant him prosperity who serves you
aids all. 'Let us praise the gods worthy of praise; let us honour those worthy of honour; let us sacrifice to
z At these our hymns of praise do thou be propitious [7],
The creaking stone is laid upon the altar, and the Adhvaryus come to turn it quickly.
4 By whom Dadhyac Navagva opens fastened doors, by whom the sages gained their wish,
great radiance', he says; verily in the world of heaven he bestows light upon him. 'Stretching the thread
Homage to the cattle, to the lord of cattle, I pay;
6 To him who lauds thee, craving help, most youthful envoy! through our song,
16 The red and tawny mare, blaze-marked, high standing, celestial who, to bring Rjrasva riches,
Him, bright and radiant, living men have stablished as their blithe Priest, the Chief of Sacrificers.
loosened, and thus is he ill long; verily he supports his breaths in him, and even if his life be gone, yet he
There stand the Three Steers, splendid in their brightness, who fill the three world-bowls with genial
7 Another with his mighty stride hath made his three steps thither where the Gods rejoice.
17 If one, when seated, with excessive urging hath with his heel or with his whip distressed thee,
The drops divine are lifted up for thee, the God, to drink them first.
At once the cows yield milk, the barleymeal is dressed. For thee,
O Indra, thou hast filled mid-air's wide region, and given the Gods by battle room and freedom.
The word vibhūti refers to the great śhaktis (powers) of God manifesting in the universe. The word yogam refers to God’s connection with these wonderful powers. In this verse, Shree Krishna explains that when we become aware of the magnificence of the Supreme Lord and become convinced about his glory, we naturally become inclined to engage in his devotion.Knowledge of the greatness of God nourishes the love of the devotees and enhances their devotion. There is a direct relationship between knowledge and love, as the following example reveals. Let us say that your friend shows you a black pebble-like stone. You have no knowledge of its importance, and thus, you have no love for it either. Your friend says, “This is a śhāligrām, and a saintly personality has gifted it to me.” A śhāligrām is a special kind of fossil stone worshipped as a representation of Lord Vishnu. If you are aware of the significance of śhāligrāms, when you receive this knowledge that the stone is a śhāligrām, your appreciation for it will increase. Let us say your friend further adds, “Do you know it used to be worshipped five hundred years ago by the great saint, Swami Ramananda?” The moment you hear this piece of knowledge, your respect for the stone will increase further. Each time, it is the knowledge that is boosting your reverence for the stone. Similarly, proper knowledge of God enhances devotion toward him. Thus, having described God’s majestic splendors that manifest in the wondrous workings of unlimited universes, Shree Krishna states that those who become situated in this knowledge naturally become united with him through unflinching bhakti.
I generate a laud that shall delight him, new and heroic, so that he may hear us.
and strength, he does not end it. 'O Agni, three are thy strengths, three thy abodes', with this (verse)
deserted; he broods on it, and is liable to become terrible (rudrá) [1], and lay to rest the offspring and
his own quarter. He sprinkles it twice, to make it divided into four. The former offerings are cattle, Agni
15. The (pestle of) wood has come to us together with the gods: it drives away the Rakshas and Pisâkas. Up it
misfortune; verily on (a place) seized by misfortune he makes misfortune seize upon him. With what is
he grasped it, and sacrificed with it. Then in deed did he shine. Those, who knowing thus perform (the
3. For us thou winnest, Agni, God, heroic strength exceeding great, Far-spreading and of high renown.
4 The strong who never yields, who slew the furious fiend, the deep, the vast, of wisdom unattainable;
2 As thine, O Indu, is the praise, and thine what springeth from the juice,
8. Song-lover! like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma flows.
4 Flow onward with thy juice unto the banquet of the Mighty Gods:
14 That, O ye Maruts, we may long time flourish through your abundant riches, O swift movers,
sap to Soma; verily he ransoms from Agni his body, from Soma his sap, and even if his life is gone, yet
him, the fire is consecration; the royal consecration is the consecration of Varuna; (the fire) to be piled is
Flow to the song inspiring car-borne hero, to mighty Indra, him who wields the thunder!
5 Soma, while purifying, sends hither all things to be desired,
1. THY gladdening draughts, O Pavamana, urged by song flow swiftly of themselves like sons of fleetfoot mares.
b Thou art taken with a support; to Çanda thee! This is thy birthplace; guard the folk.
3. Your lofty coursers hasten over the everlasting realm, whea your car flies with winged steeds.
9 Sindhu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by steeds, and with that car shall she win booty in this
4 The ridges of the lofty heaven thou madest shake; thou, daring, of thyself smotest through Sambara,
rite) of thirteen nights. They say, '(The rite) of twelve days is the sequence of speech. They would cleave
O Bird, be ominous of happy fortune from no side may calamity befall thee.
the mother of twins did attain: may she not injure our imen and our cattle!
year; verily in the seasons and the year they find sup port. Again the Pankti is of five elements, the
So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra who is true.
9 Aided by thee, with thee allied, in frays for water and for sun,
12 Send riches hither with thy stream in thousands, both of steeds and kine,
O Indra, they have called to thee as mother-kine unto their calves.
I all at once demolish many thousands: my Sire begot me with no foe to match me.
(he recites) aloud, that is (the foundation) of the other cups; he who knows thus becomes possessed of a
Down the steep slope, through song, he comes to sacrifice, and he will burst the water-holding cask of
That, Bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her fortune and her sons.
The steed hath come to the atmosphere; the strong steed hath made Vayu his yoke-follow.
7 Thou, Indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which were poured for
Prajapati; Rudra; Varuna; Agni; lord of the quarters; may he protect our cattle, may he protect us, to him
a Firm is thy dwelling, thy place of birth, firm art thou
Whom fleet-foot coursers seek as home, and strong enduring steeds as home. Bring food to those who
9 Since thou, God Tvastar, hast made beauty perfect, since hou hast been the Angirases' Companion,
2. Sing forth, ye men who long for help, to Pavamana, to the Sage,
portion of Mitra', (with these words he puts down) on the west; Mitra is expiration, Varuna inspiration;
4. Flow of blood attacks the cattle-owner from the spot where her dung is deposited: this understanding there is
4 None breaks these holy laws of thine when thou hast granted audience to these chieftains here.
Knowing all priestly work thou perfectest it, Sage. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
Now with our ears we catch the sound of the press-stone that rings afar.
who are heroic, the eaten those that are prolific. The offspring of him who knows thus becomes an eater,
6 Ye with your plough, when favouring Manu with your help, ploughed the first harvest in the sky.
3 Faithful art thou, these thou defiest, Indra; thou art the Rbhus' Lord, heroic, victor.
8 Let the three Goddesses – Bharati, the Goddess of prosperity, Ila, the Goddess of power,
6. Powerless, O arrow, is thy point, and powerless is thy poison. Moreover of powerless wood is thy powerless
place; with the Jagati metre I grasp thee in the manner of Angiras.
3 Even if, O Soma, I neglect thy laws through my simplicity,
Let no men check thy course as fowlers stay the bird: pass o'er them as o'er desert lands!
1. This plant is born of honey, with honey do we dig for thee. Of honey thou art begotten, do thou make us full of
second; if with the second now, he would make a failure with the first; there is no offering at all and no
5 I call, as such, the Sons of bounteous Rudra: will not the Maruts turn again to us-ward?
9 So, wakeful, versed in sacred hymns, the holy singers kindly thee.
The strong will win the spoil on the decisive day through faith in thee, O Maghavan.
4. The magic which they have put for thee into moveable property, or into personal possession, the spell which
10 Of one accord they made and formed for kingship Indra, the Hero who in all encounters overcometh,
2. For the Gods' worship hath the priest been wakened: kind Agni hath arisen erect at morning.
they saw these bodies of the sacrifice, they put them down, and by them they recovered the sacrifice. In
2. Naught else, O Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer's eulogy;
5 Indra is hewho gives enduring vigour: may our songs magnify the God Most Mighty.
5 Thrice in the day didst thou embrace thy consort, though coldly she received thy fond caresses.
6 Give us not up to any evil creature, as spoil to wolf or she-wolf, O ye Holy.
him; he makes the Yajya and the Puronuvakya of the Çakvari (metre); the Çakvari is the thunderbolt, the
wife of another [3], nor after piling for a third time should he have intercourse with any woman
16. As bees carry together honey upon honey, thus in my own person, O Asvins, lustre shall be sustained!
23 Compared with whom no other ten strong coursers, harnessed to the pole,
5 Indra, with thine own bounteous gift, most liberal of the Mighty Ones,
4 When for the sake of those oppressed, and Kutsa as he battled,
Indra is the (combatant) standing on the left of the chariot, Kandramas (the moon) the charioteer.
22 When, Indra and Vrsakapi, ye travelled upward to your home,
7 Ten Kings who worshipped not, O Indra-Varuna, confederate, in war prevailed not o'er Sudas.
pressing; then indeed they performed the third pressing. In that (the cup) for Savitr is drawn at the third
12 Navagvas and Dasgvas with libations of Soma juice sing hymns of praise to Indra.
forward from the back place; 'Homage to thee, O extended one', he says; the extended are the rays of the
enemy. The gods in the beginning seized these (nights), sharing the days [1]. One took one day, one
Grace is like a divine energy that floods into a person’s personality. By grace, God who is sat-chit-ānand bestows his divine knowledge, divine love, and divine bliss. This entrenches the intellect, like the North Star, in the love, bliss, and knowledge of God. By God’s grace, when we experience the higher taste of divine bliss, the agitation for sensual happiness is extinguished. Once that hankering for material objects ceases, one goes beyond all suffering and the mind becomes tranquil. In that state of internal fulfillment, the intellect becomes firm in its decision that God alone is the source of happiness and is the final goal of the soul. Previously, the intellect was accepting this only on the basis of knowledge as stated in the scriptures, but now it gets the experience of perfect peace and divine bliss. This convinces the intellect beyond any shadow of doubt, and it becomes steadily situated in God.
that poureth blessings, accompanied by the cry 'Hail!', standing in the waters, do ye follow the
That thou didst smite to death the Dame, Heaven's Daughter, meditating ill.
17 For Indra, living men adorn the Tawny Courser in the streams, Indu, the giver of delight.
The purifiers, shining brightly even as suns, awful of form like giants, scattering rain-drops down.
Thence, with thy team, accordant with the Maruts, Song-lover! guard our sacrifice, to help us.
As explained in chapters 7 and 8, the material creation follows cycles of creation, maintenance, and dissolution. During dissolution, souls who are vimukh (have their backs) toward God remain in a state of suspended animation within the body of Maha Vishnu. The material energy, prakṛiti, also lies unmanifest in God’s mahodar (big stomach). When he desires to activate the process of creation, he glances at prakṛiti. It then begins to unwind, and sequentially, the entities mahān, ahankār, pañch-tanmātrās, and pañch-mahābhūta are created. Also, with the help of the secondary creator Brahma, the material energy creates various life forms, and God casts the souls into appropriate bodies, determined by their past karmas. Thus, Shree Krishna states that prakṛiti is like the womb and the souls are like the sperms. He places the souls in the womb of Mother Nature to give birth to multitudes of living beings. Sage Ved Vyas also describes it in the same fashion in Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam:daivāt kṣhubhita-dharmiṇyāṁ svasyāṁ yonau paraḥ pumānādhatta vīryaṁ sāsūta mahat-tattvaṁ hiraṇmayam (3.26.19)[v1]“In the womb of the material energy the Supreme Lord impregnates the souls. Then, inspired by the karmas of the individual souls, the material nature gets to work to create suitable life forms for them.” He does not cast all souls into the material world, rather only those who are vimukh.
Thou hast filled earth and heaven and air's mid-region, and followest the whole world like a shadow.
5 As a wright bends a chariot-seat so round my heart I bend the hymn:
1. Bright are these Somas blent with milk, with light that flashes brilliantly,
being expelled should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the good protector [4]; verily he has
third three nights begin with the Tristubh, the Çukra is connected with the Tristubh [3]; in that the Çukra
2.3.3.5 Mantra 5: The Mantras for the Prçni Cups at the Dvadaçaha
Bring meed as 'twere to one who makes thee glad with hymns!
1. Soon as the Sun hath risen I sing to you, to Mitra, Varuna,
says; therefore what a man conceives with mind he utters with speech; 'with friendly (mind) he says, to
1. MAY Indra come to us for our protection; here be the Hero, praised, our feast-companion.
seasons, in the seasonal periods, and in the year they find support and win offspring. There are Atiratras
Convey him on the road direct to glory, and ne'er may Vayu's Amrta cease and fail him.
E'en Agni shines resplendent in the brush-wood: the viands hold him as floods hold an island.
14 May Rudra's missile turn aside and spare us, the great wrath of the impetuous One avoid us.
union of the waters and of the plants, to attain both. The sacrificial post is bifurcate, for there are two
O Son of Strength, the Gods thou satisfiest, so in fight save us, most heroic Agni.
15, Upon thee have ascended the brihatî and the pankti (metres), upon thee the kakubh with splendour, O
cow with a white back. The second (sap) which fell Mitra and Varuna seized; it became a cow of two
world of heaven by the single (layer). He makes (them) firm with mortar; therefore the bone is covered
g 'The sacrifice offered by the Bhrgus, the Vasus, accord our desires; of thee thus offered, enjoyed, may
hymn with his own share [2]; he gives him food; verily he becomes an eater of food. He who desires
3 This food glows for thee as of old at sacrifice, wherein they made thee chooser of the place , for thou
32. As the sun is released from darkness, abandons the night, and the streaks of the dawn, thus every misery,
thereby they bestowed upon it [2] radiance. For him who desires splendour he should offer this oblation
Send us from heaven, O Varuna and Mitra, rain and sweet food, ye who pour down your bounties.
are three animals which take by the hand, man, the elephant, and the ape.
yonder (sky); verily he stands firm on yonder (sky). They say, 'Where are the Jagati and the Anustubh?'
25 Who cleft the water-cloud in twain, loosed rivers for their downward flow,
47. Thy many paths upon which people go, thy tracks for chariots and wagons to advance, upon which both good
3 Incited by the wind thy flames, O Agni, move onward, Pure One! pure, in all directions.
5 May the Five Tribes be pleased with mine oblation, and the Cow's Sons and all who merit worship.
5. Mitra who knoweth leadeth us, and Varuna who guideth straight,
5 They know the red Bull's blessing, and are joyful under the flaming-coloured Lord's dominion:
then he becomes Visnu and conquers these worlds. He should offer on an uneven (place), for these
2 May Narasamsa lighting up the chambers, bright in his majesty through threefold heaven,
'On the impulse of the god Savitr', (with these words) he takes up the spade, for impelling. 'With the
thou art the winner of thunder; thou art the winner of rain.
b Thou art Indra's right arm with a thousand spikes, a hundred edges.
earth shall guard thee, the sun and moon shall guard thee, the atmosphere shall guard thee against the divine
O She of bright bulls hath come with the cloud, the light,
c O Agni, lead us by a fair path to wealth,
55. The sacrifice first, (and then) what is and what shall be was born. From that this all was born, and whatever
4. The cow of the Brahman, when roasted, as far as she reaches does she destroy the lustre of the kingdom; no
eaters and the eaten. 'Engendering heroic off spring), come forth, Çukra, with pure radiance' [4],
1. Heaven and earth, the broad atmosphere, the goddess of the field, and the wonderful, far-striding (Vishnu);
and thunder with swelling sound; make music at thy friend's victory, having, (chosen) the good side!
Or let the chariot of thee that hast a thousand (steeds)
15 Duly to each one hath my laud been offered. Strong be Varutri with her powers to succour.
17 As we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteenth part,
3 He who is poured with milk, he who within the plants hastes bringing treasure for the happiness of
the fifth day is connected with the Rathantara, and therefore on the fifth day [2] (the cup) for Indra and
3. He shines in beauty there, this God, immortal, in his dwellingplace,
4. The gâyânya, winged, flies; he settles down upon man. Here is the remedy both for sores not caused by cutting
says; verily upon offspring he bestows breath. 'Thou art the Trivrt, thou art the Pravrt', he says, for
Halting not, reinless, through the air it travels, speeding alone its paths through earth and heaven.
4 Her very name I utter not: she takes no pleasure in this man.
2 Relax that mortal's stubborn strength whose heart is bent on wickedness.
10 To the wise man, O Sage and Sovran Ruler, the man who knoweth all thine ancient exploits.
1. Soma, flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to the reservoirs,
2 1 worship Agni, Youthfullest of Gods, resistless, Friend of laws;
1. OF this our charming, our celestial Soma, eloquent, wise, Priest, with inspired devotion,
Making the three-times seven pour out the milky stream, Soma, the cheerer, yields whate'er the heart
the broad atmosphere', he says, for atonement. Now he who grasps hold of the beast as it is led to death
mean distance; verily his food becomes the same; if he desire of a man, 'May his food become more', he
9 O Indra, Dancer, Much-invoked! as thy great power is unsurpassed,
10 Thou over all, O Varuna, art Sovran, be they Gods, Asura! or be they mortals.
10. The drops of Soma juice, like cows who yield their milk, have flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the diety,
him to eat food; he finds support for whom these (are placed) on the west, full of support; he becomes
thus offers the five-night rite is distinguished from the enemy that hates him. Sarvaseni Çauceya desired,
3 Brhaspati in war hath won rich treasures, hath won, this God, the great stalls filled with cattle.
4 In battels and in frays we ministering priests, kneeling upon our knees for furtherance of our weal,
Then, O ye Maruts, ye who spring from Rudra, be our protectors in the strife with foemen.
3. Yea, Aditi, and those great Kings whose statute is inviolate, Are sovrans of a vast domain.
'O lord of food, accord us food', he says; the lord of food is Agni; verily he grants him food.
5 Immortal Agni, thee whose voice is pleasant, as first in rank, as God, religious mortals
7 Earth's central point, sustainer of the mighty heavens, distilled into the streams, into the waters' wave,
man, do not enter it! Danger is beyond, security here for thee.
1. HEARD be our prayer! In thought I honour Agni first: now straightway we elect this heavenly
hymn tune, the Yajus, consecration, penance, the season, the vow (prosper) through the rain of day and
Prajapati assigned the sacrifices to the gods. He placed in himself the oblation. The gods said to him,
2. The God declares the deities' generations, like Uaana, proclaiming lofty wisdom.
the death of the Raksases; the Raksases are slain; we have killed the Raksases.
Best be Pratardani, illustrious ruler, in slaying foemen and in gaining riches.
Disposer, he with mental power shows all things unto him who strives;
it. Now the Trivrt is brilliance; verily they place brilliance in themselves. There is a praise of Indra with
third, in the waters a third, in the Brahman a third. Therefore one should put beside him a pot of water
1. MOUNT the Bay Horses to thy chariot harnessed, and come to us like Vayu with his coursers.
1. SAY, bringing sacrifice to bounteous Rudra, This juice for drink to you whose wrath is fleeting!
to the final bath; the ocean when gone; the water when dipped; the heaven when arrived at completion.
not fall, the cups are breaths; verily he frees the breaths of the people from pain, and rain soon falls.
6. May they in flowing give us wealth in thousands, and heroic power,-These godlike Soma drops effused!
for the dead a barren cow. If he were to offer in the northern half or the middle, he would cause conflict
3. Even here is he who, swift of course, hath with the river's wave Rowed down.
2 Armed with your daggers, full of wisdom, armed with spears, armed with your quivers, armed with
3. Sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars, led by the men into the golden reservoir.
deposited to prevent the entry of the Raksases. He sets down in the north track of the southern oblationcart; verily he places speech in speech. They lie (there) until the third pressing, for the continuity of the
2 Whoso with toil and trouble brings thee fuel, serving the majesty of mighty Agni,
Those who have rested in the earthly region, and those who dwell among the Mighty Races.
7 Now run ye forth your several ways: he is not here who kept you back.
Rich in good heroes and subduing foemen. That vital power give thou to chiefs and singers.
Vamra when glorified destroyed the gathered piles of the still waxing great one who would reach the
3 He, the bright Son, when born illumed his Parents who had sprung to life,
the overlordship. They praised with twenty-nine, trees were created, Soma was the overlord. They
nights, becomes resplendent. (The rite) is of eight nights; the quarters are four, the intermediate quarters
23 O Soma, Pavamana, thou pourest out wealth that brings renown:
Prajapati assigned food to the gods; he said, 'Whatever shall be left over these worlds, be that mine.'
6. Why 'mid the Nahusha tribes shall sate this Indra with his Soma juice?
The wish calls me to riches and well-being: praise the unwearied Ones whose steeds are dappled.
connected with the All-gods, the Çukra is yonder sun, in that he draws (the cup) for the All-gods with
6 The sages knew the form of him the Gladdener, what time the Falcon brought the plant from far
Throws off his covering, seeks his father's meeting-place, and thus makes for himself the bright robe he
4 Him, whom the heavenly food of these delighted, child of the mist, strong waxing, couched in
Brightly he shone aloft on Order's summit: the hosts sang glory to their common birthplace.
4 Dawn drives away her Sister's gloom, and, through her excellence, makes her retrace her path.
5 Transversely was their severing line extended: what was above it then, and what below it?
Whose majesty, rich in wondrous arts, surpasseth the magnitude of earth, and heaven in greatness.
f The cutters of the stake, the bearers of the stake,
And men have faith in Indra, the respIendent One, what time he hurleth down his bolt, his dart of death.
Indra raised his bolt to hurl at Vrtra; Vrtra was afraid of the bolt when raised to be hurled; he said, 'Hurl
Endued with majesty and strength, O Indra, and with lordly might,
c 'Homage to Agni, slayer of Makha; may the glory of Makha impel me'--(with these words) he
With mighty strength, most liberal of the Princes, Chiefs of the host, by Law made Vrtra's slayers.
g Of pure radiance, of varied radiance, of true radiance, the radiant, true, protector of holy order [2],
14 While thou art cleansed, Song-Lover, bring comfort and vigour to the folk,
they say; in that there is ploughed and unploughed (it serves) to restrain Agni. So many are animals,
4 He is the Herald: well-informed, he doth his errand to and fro,
They should be offered for one who desires the kingdom; the Rastrabhrts are the kingdom; verily with
5 As to the men of old thou camest, Indu unharmed, to strengthen, winning hundreds, thousands,
8 The freed kine eat the barley of the pious. 1 saw them as they wandered with the herdsman.
3 May the Gods grant me riches; may the blessing and invocation of the Gods assist me.
3. Like streams of water on their way, let bounties, Indra, flow from thee!
He hath appeared, the mighty Lord of Conquest. What we would have him do let him accomplish.
m Thou art the eastern, the western (quarter) of the Vasus, the Rudras [2], the Adityas.
14 The good man's refuge in his need is Indra, firm as a doorpost, praised among the Pajras.
2 Now all this world, for worship, shall come after thee-the offerer's libations like floods to the depth,
2 Ye, as ye wist, have gained of your own selves your power: high, O ye Mighty Ones, and wide ye
When, Mightiest! Hero-girt! Nahusa heroes boast them in thee, the triply-strong Defender.
to him; he becomes possessed of a village. He places (the offering) for Indra on the Ahavaniya, that for
holder, everything is given as on the strew. The gods [3] could not find the suitable day for the sacrifice.
6 The hewers of the post and those who carry it, and those who carve the knob to deck the Horse's
The Hero Indra, conquering all, Most Bounteous, God of all the tribes.
Çakvara (Saman), the winter (season), an oblation (is made). To Savitr, of the Atichandas (metre), the
penance, Prajapati's kind', he says, verily the Adhvaryu makes atonement to the cattle, that he may not
ruin with respect to the Brahman'; he should use as the Yajya and the Anuvakya verses referring to the
not accept the nature of the sheep. A measure of himself he obtains who accepts (an animal) with teeth
bowl priest of the Maitravaruna, run hither'. he says; Mitra and Varuna are the leaders of the waters;
2 Most wise is he who, forcing doors of Panis, brought the bright Sun to us who feedeth many.
2 With callings ever they invoke Agni, Agni, Lord of the House,
7 Whether they weep or laugh, thou hast o'erthrown them, O Indra, on the sky's extremest limit.
1. With fruit turned backward thou verily didst grow, O apâmârga: do thou drive all curses quite far away from
Swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he stretched his forefeet, fain to win and triumph.
hither', he says. Rudra is the harsh [7] one of the gods; verily he places him below her, for guiding
2 Rejoicing in his friendship, let the priest be seated over man,
5 With humble homage, Indra, have the Soma-drops flowed forth to thee,
4 Shine forth, a Bull invincible, O Agni, winning by conquest all the forts and treasures,
1. GREAT, unassailable must he the heavenly favour of' Three Gods,
9 The Waters' Son hath risen, and clothed in lightning ascended up unto the curled cloud's bosom;
Wise Asura, thou King of wide dominion, loosen the bonds of sins by us committed.
2. O Vayu, thou and Indra are meet drinkers of these Soma draughts,
9 Surya hath yoked the pure bright Seven, the daughters of the car; with these,
Whereon the bounteous Dame, auspicious, nobly born, shows glorious with the Marut host.
22 Where bliss is not, may he, All-praised, God whom the pious glorify,
strenorth, as the sun takes away the strength of persons asleep (while it rises).
For thee, the Strong, I yoke thy strong Bay Horses: may our prayers reach thee and win strength, Most
the giver of splendour; verily the year gives him splendour; he becomes resplendent. At the end of the
13. Of all the male worms, and of all the female worms do I split the heads with the stone, I burn their faces with
5 In the company of learned people, the one who uses his faculty of speech meaningfully, courteously,
bundle has its name. Whatever of his foe's he may covet, the name of that he should utter; verily he wing
As thou art great indeed, thy greatness is admired: yea, verily, thou, God, art great.
12 He hath the Power to soothe Mitra and Varuna: wonderful is the Maruts' wrath when they descend.
6. O horse of Pedu, go thou first: we come after thee! Thou shalt cast out the serpents from the road upon which
11 Most deadly is thy bow, successful, fashioned well: good is thine arrow, decked with gold.
6 Then, beautifully radiant, certain Heavenly Ones, have sung to him their kinship as they looked
1. IN whose wild joy thou madest once Sambara Divodasa's prey,
The fit word have I caught and held as 'twere a courser with the rein.
By songs a Poet and a Sage by wisdom, Soma joes singing through the cleansing filter.
1.9.17 Mantra 17 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Asita Kasyapa, Devala Kasyapa)
Thou gavest to thy worshipper Rjisvan imperishable Wealth, O Bounteous Giver.
To thee speed hymns and eulogies, as horses haste, bearing him who loves the song, to battle.
I., HENCE sprinkle forth the juice effused,. Soma, the best of sacred gifts,
Hear, when invoked, the invoker's invocation. Beside thee there is nonelike thee, Immortal!
24. As splendour is in Pragâpati, as in this Parameshthin (the lord on high), thus shall the amulet of varana hold
8 And may the Asvins, the divine Pair of Physicians, send us health:
34 The whcel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied by song,
22 Drive down your chariot hitherward drink ye the Soma's savoury juice.
Anumati; the cuckoo is for the half months; the tortoise for the months; the Kvayi, the Kutaru, the
They who direct the three great gatherings with their thoughts, yea, all things with surpassing might.
1. The fleet steed wearing divers forms, the eagle bearing his golden raiment to his birthplace,
Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, beneath your arms.
8 Driving thee in Vivasvan's course, the Seven Sisters with their hymns
instigation', (with these words) he offers a set of twelve; the year has twelve months; verily he finds
17 Mightier even than the strong, more valiant even than the brave,
round two girdles, therefore one man wins two wives; in that he does not wind one girdle round two
Soma," the Soma is not supported, the Stoma is not supported, the hymns are not supported, the
midday pressing, who hast the Tristubh for thy metre, who art drunk by Indra, who art drunk by
9 Tvastar the Lord hath made all forms and all the cattle of the field
13 Dear to all Gods, may Pasan guard the ways we go, the Waters' child and Vayu help us to success.
Mixt with the streams he caused the beakers to resound, and with the singers' aid they entered Indra's
2 On flows that Ancient One whom, hitherward, from heaven, sped through the region of the air, the
6 O Asvins, ye are wise: as Kutsa comes to men, bring your car nigh the folk of him who sings your
Even in the river's bed there is a shallow. across this broad expanse may they conduct us.
Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, Lord of wealth, we seek thee, Indra Maghavan.
of the victim, the prosperity thereof; verily in the redundant he deposits the redundant, to appease the
These speak of truth, praising the Truth Eternal, thinking on Order as the guards of Order.
6 Now, O Virupa, rouse for him, Strong God who shines at early morn,
2 Yea, now ye Gods of one accord speed on our car what time among the folk it seeks an act of might;
Friends come to Pavamana meet for praises, and sound in concert their resistless music.
18 O Indra, give our bodies strength, strength to the bulls who draw the wains,
1. In every need, in every fray we call, as friends to succour us,
q That is thine, O father, and those that are after thee. That is thine, O grandfather, O great-grandfather,
places splendour on the south; therefore the right side is the more resplendent. 'Support, the thirty
In this verse, Shree Krishna mentions that those enlightened souls who know Him are truly devoted to Him, and even at the time of their death, they are in full consciousness of Him. Such true devotees attain His divine abode. But how can one remember God even at the time of death? Death is said to be a very painful journey, comparable to 2000 scorpions biting at the same time. Such extreme pain is beyond the tolerance of any normal human; a person loses consciousness; the mind and the intellect stop working much before the end. One cannot remember anything in that state. Where is the question of remembering God? How do they do it then?Those enlightened beings who have attained true knowledge are ever filled with devotion to God, their mind and intellect, all surrendered and attached to Him alone. Thus, their bodies are beyond pleasure and pain even at the time of death. Their soul is completely disconnected from lamentation and hankering at the material level because it is no longer in bodily consciousness. Shree Krishna has explained the words adhibhūta, adhidaiva, and adhiyajña in the next chapter.
I be possessed of a head in yonder world'; verily he becomes possessed of a head in yonder world. He
Give us a share in that delightful treasure, the genuine wealth that, Bulls! is your possession.
9 Protect us, Agni, through the first, protect us through the second hymn,
5 Ye freed Cyavana from old age and weakness: ye brought the courser fleet of food to Pedu.
says, for all the gods delight in it, in that the Brahmans so do. 'Accomplishing (the rite) with Rc, Saman,
verily he makes him go to the world of heaven. 'With my form I approach your form', he says; for by his
The secret of sacrifice, as mentioned previously, is the understanding that it should be performed for the pleasure of God, and then the remnants can be taken as his prasād (grace). For example, devotees of the Lord partake of food after offering it to him. After cooking the food, they place it on the altar and pray to God to accept their offering. In their mind, they meditate on the sentiment that God is actually eating from the plate. At the end of the offering, the remnants on the plate are accepted as prasād, or the grace of God. Partaking of such nectar-like prasād leads to illumination, purification, and spiritual advancement. In the same mood, devotees offer clothes to God and then wear them as his prasād. They install his deity in their house, and then live in it with the attitude that their home is the temple of God. When objects or activities are offered as sacrifice to God, then the remnants, or prasād, are a nectar-like blessing for the soul. The great devotee Uddhav told Shree Krishna:  tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-vāso ’laṅkāra-charchitāḥ  uchchhiṣhṭa-bhojino dāsās tava māyāṁ jayema hi  (Bhāgavatam 11.6.46)[v26] “I will only eat, smell, wear, live in, and talk about objects that have first been offered to you. In this way, by accepting the remnants as your prasād, I will easily conquer Maya.” Those who do not perform sacrifice remain entangled in the fruitive reactions of work and continue to experience the torments of Maya.
verily he makes him go to his own birth place; his food becomes fit to eat. He who desires a village
'Thou art the impeller', he says, for he brings them up. 'To the gods the servants of the gods have come',
19 Whoso would kill us, whether he be a strange foe or one of us,
Night, sent away for Savitar's uprising, hath yielded up a birth-place for the Morning.
horse sacrifice is an extensive sacrifice; 'who knows', they say, 'if all of it is done or not?' In that the
So, Lord of fair dominion, Friend of all men, give us splendid wealth.
1. ALL is with thee, O Indra, all the treasures which erst our fathers won who sang thy praises.
e Homage to him who slayeth in front, and to him who slayeth at a distance.
Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as Savitar the God is, truthfulminded.
1. SIT down, O friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself:
Honour with holy gifts the Car like Indra's bolt, the Car bound round with straps, the vigour of the floods.
hast a tawny embryo', he says; verily he sends it to the gods, to smite away the Raksases. 'Bring near, O
9 Ye Asvins Twain, endowed with manly strength, brought forth Reblia when hidden in the cave and
Where no way was he made him set his footstep, and warned afar whate'er afflicts the spirit.
man, 'May he possess cattle', he should put down for him the water (bricks) and then put down the
art gentle, resting well, auspicious; come to me as gentle, well resting, auspicious,' [3] he says; verily she
3 His flames that wax not old, beams fair to look upon of him whose face is lovely, shine with
Dawn, may I gain that wealth, renowned and ample, in brave sons, troops of slaves, far-famed for
4 Before all birds be ranked this Bird, O Maruts; supreme of falcons be this fleet-winged Falcon,
16 If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Visnu's or Trta Aptya's side,
8 The fifteen lauds are in a thousand places that is as vast as heaven and earth in measure.
1. High is thy juice's birth: though set it heaven, on earth it hath obtained dread sheltering power and great
10 Food undigested steaming from his belly, and any odour of raw flesh remaining,
2 Thou, verily, Indra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly giving car to him in battle,
Varuna, Indra, Mitra were of one accord, and Savitar and Bhaga, Lords of holy might.
The proffered ladle filled with offerings balm thee, best of priests, to sit on sacred grass!
Like a steed urged to run in swift career, rushing like Sindhu, who may check his course?
And, in embraces intertwined, both give and take the bliss of love. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and
father, he became their son; there is, verily, no other force, higher than he.
year must it be borne, then is he propagated. To him the Vasus said, 'Thou hast been propagated; let us
12 Pour thou upon us thousandfold possessions, both of kine and steeds,
Like Manus, for the pious man , Angiras, Agni, worship Gods.
Best charioteer, the Victor marks each fault, he knows the strong to whom he will come near.
7. O takman, go to the Mûgavants, or to the Balhikas farther away! Seek the lecherous Sûdra female: her, O
1. Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laud-worthy, speeding through the region and the flood,
3 Him, glowing bright beyond all thought, they seek among the race of man;
b Homage to the leader, the holder of the quiver, to the lord of thieves homage!
rule over you; the seers did rule over you. Let them make evident to the enemies when (a man) has been pierced
1. WE have beheld her earliest lights approaching: her many glories part, on high, asunder.
As strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring us hitherward Bhaga who discovers treasure.
The Sparkler, joyous in his Parents' bosorn, -him, the Truth-speaker, sate ye, Earth and Heaven.
6. From thy bones, marrow, sinews and arteries; from thy hands, fingers, and nails I do tear out the disease.
Out of a horse, Sudhanvan's Sons, ye formed a horse: a chariot ye equipped, and went unto the Gods.
Thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard. Keep the destructive lightning far away from us.
He who is Chief of men, their armies' Leader, is strong Hero, bold, and fain for booty.
44 Come hither, bring the Gods to us to taste the sacrificial feast,
sacrifices verily thus one kindles Agni. There was an Asura, named Etadu. He then appropriated the
Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink juice, O Asvins, three days old.
the weapons of the sacrifice; the weapons of the sacrifice are the sacrifice [3]; verily he wins the
he says; verily they now remove their sin. Slave girls dance round the Marjaliya fire with water-pots on
and thereby he causes rain to fall. 'The gods whose portion is in the sky', (with these words) he shakes
get to choose the man of their choice. Some women are trapped, into accepting a man by his sweet
Straightway the self-reliant God, Most Youthful, gives treasures to the mortal who adores him.
They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice, poured forth the worshipper's many thoughts.
offers in the Agnidh's fire with a verse containing the word 'lead', for leading to the world of heaven. He
Make Heaven and Earth propitious through the power of prayer, and like the sky's bright sheen let
7 Three are those births, the true, the most exalted, eagerly longed-for, of the God, of Agni.
e For barley, for milk, this food eat, O ye gods; this food eat, O Prajapati.
bowmen; ye who rule all these two-footed and four-footed creatures, deliver us from calamity!
Strong, listening to give us aid in battles, who slays the Vritras, wins and gathers riches!
4 Thy Father Dyaus esteemed himself a hero: most noble was the work of Indra's Maker,
Indra, these (cups), for Indra kept making these forms. The Çukra is yonder sun, the Manthin is the
b Thou art taken with a support; to Indra with the Maruts thee,
15 Pass us not by, remember us with thousands both of kine aud steeds:
6 Here is the man who lauds you both: to see your glory are we here.
3 Bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him in want of food and feeble.
5. May the wind (Mâtarisvan) purify you. May the waters shower thee with Amrita (ambrosia) bringing you
4 May the divine Sarasvati, rich in her wealth, protect us well,
With others through the realms ye roam in might unto the neighbouring tribes.
2 One is Agni (fire) kindled in various ways; One is Surya (sun) shining over all;
thy highest edge, (make) the Soma well pressed for Indra, rich in sweetness, in milk, bringing rain.
1. THERE are the Dawn and Night, the grand and beauteous Pair, Earth, Heaven, and Varuna, Mitra,
7 The groats have we prepared for thee with Pusan, corn for thee, Lord of Bay Steeds, with thy horses.
28 The cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling; she licks his forehead, as she lows, to form it.
Indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, honoured as breaker-down of forts.
1. May the serpent, ye gods, not slay us along with our children and our men! The closed (jaw) shall not snap
9 Here, Api, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee as their Priest in sacred gatherings,
3. Deep down do the Asuras bury this great healer of wounds: that is the cure for discharges, and thal hath
3. O Gâtavedas (Agni), cause thou to turn ill; a hundred way's hither shall be thine, a thousand modes of return
13 May we be never cast aside, and strangers, as it were, to thee.
The Gods came pressing to thy side, and free from terror aided thee,
He draws cups of water; the cups are the royal consecration; the fire is the consecration; the royal
Maintain their statutes, void of guilt14 As such, from mouth of ravening wolves, O ye Adityas, rescue us,
10 Drawing the milk of ancient seed prolific, they joyed as they beheld their own possession.
Over which Hail! is said and which goeth back to the gods
gâyatri. They shall enter thee with kindly spirit; the calf Rohita with its mother shall come on!
Paras have their name. In that the Paras are drawn, (it serves) to win that which one does not win by the
unimpaired strength! O Bhava and Sarva, take pity, grant Protection; misfortune drive away, and life bestow!
cattle. There are ten oblations. Nine are the breaths in man, and the navel is the tenth; verily he places
2.6.3.7 Mantra 7: The Samidhenis, Anointing with the Butter, the Fore-Sacrifices
7 You, Bards and Singers at men's sacrifices, both filled with wisdom, I incline to worship.
Indra, the hosts agree beside the Soma, and joy, for his great actions, in the Chieftain.
Assist our holy thoughts, wake up our spirit: weaken the hatred of our foe and rivals.
16. (And also make them see) her that strides upon the mist, the mutilated one, who dwells with the mutilated; the
Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou holdest. O Indra, mayst thou turn the Asvins hither.
verily he wins brilliance [5]; he gives the silken garment; verily he wins cattle; he gives a cow; verily he
two, heaven and earth, not suffer from hunger and not from thirst!
strength for me, may the Çastra of the Çastra come to me', he says; this is the milking of the Stotra and
Stir up the wrath and hatred due to one who holds an alien creed.
So far in this chapter, Shree Krishna has detailed that His opulence is the source of all the magnificence in nature, and in creating the visible universe he does not deplete Himself. In this verse, He has called HimselfPuruṣhottam, the Divine Supreme Person who transcends over the material world, which includes bothkṣhar theperishable andakṣharthe imperishable divine souls. Does that mean thePuruṣhottamHe has referred to and Lord Shree Krishna Himself are two different entities? To eliminate any such doubts, in this verse, while referring to Himself Shree Krishna has used the termaham(I), which is first person singular. He also said that the Vedas and the Smritis have described Him similarly:kṛiṣhṇa eva paro devas taṁ dhyāyet taṁ rasayet taṁ yajet taṁ bhajed(Gopāl Tāpani Upaniṣhad)“Lord Krishna is the Supreme Lord. Meditate upon Him, relish the bliss of His devotion, worship Him, and serve Him.”yo ’sau paraṁ brahma gopālaḥ(Gopāl Tāpani Upaniṣhad)“Gopal (Lord Krishna) is the Supreme Being.”Then the question arises, who are Lord Ram, Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva, and all the other Gods and Goddesses? They are all different manifestations of the sameBhagavān, the Supreme Divine Personality and should not be considered separate.
i He puts down these unfailing (bricks), they are the gods unconquered; verily he enters them; he is not
syllables, the Viraj is food; verily by the Viraj he wins proper food [2]. 'Thou art the bodily form of
Thou sharest mighty booty in the van of war Soma, well-armed, thou art pressed out by men who
a verse addressed to Soma; verily by means of its own [3] divinity he makes it go forward. 'Thou art the
The kindred Four have been sent downward from the heavens: dropping with oil they bring Amrta and
They kindle him, a guest within his dwelling: bright shines the splendour of the worshipped Hero.
for the return (from the heaven), and for support. Having prospered in either world they cease (the rite).
15 O Brahmanaspati, may we be evermore masters of wealth well-guided, full of vital strength.
Full companies have followed for thy friendship: the pattern of thy vigour Gods have copied.
3 Dispelling gloom this day the wealthy Mornings urge liberal givers to present their treasures.
Pusan; man has Soma as his deity, cattle have Pusan; verily by his own deity, by cattle, he makes a skin
33 May dappled horses, steeds who fly with pinions, bring you hitherward
with the wondrous works. Agni Vaiçvanara in unison with the food
17 To come, Much-lauded! Many-named with this same thought that longs for milk,
the gods [5]. There is used the same Saman. The Saman is the world of the gods; verily they leave not
1. From the two fire-sticks have the men engendered, with thought, urged by the hand, the glorious
18 Lauded by Jamadagni's song, sit in the place of holy Law:
6. The asvattha-tree is the seat of the gods in the third heaven from here. There came to sight the amrita
conquers the worlds of the gods. They make twelve; the year has twelve months; verily he delights the
4 Here round about thee are the priests who laud thee, Bright One, with their hymns,
Wherewith ye travel swiftly through the regions to the prompt worshipper who brings oblation.
Rich in brave men art thou, Soma, who winnest all: these holy singers wait upon thee with the song.
sickness breaks down (the cattle) which she sniffs upon with her nose.
Roll onward to the press-boards as they cleanse thee, far-seeing at the feast of Gods and watchful!
4 The mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulence, O Vasu, he who brings thee gifts.
Achavaka's Saman is the Samkrti, (it serves) to make the horse whole, to win it entirely, to prevent
Svaha cries', he says [5], for the completion of the sacrifice. The speckled butter is the expiration and
May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away: nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.
a On the impulse of the god Savitr, with the arms of the Açvins, with the hands of Pusan, in the abode of
3 Yea, yerily, foe of hate shown to himself is he, yea, verity, destroyer too of other hate.
2. Whom, served with sacrificial oil, like Mitra, men presenting gifts,
heaven); verily he has recourse to these worlds with their own share; verily they bestow food on him; he
I. When Somas flow thou makest pure, Indra, thy mind that merits laud
3 Thou aidest Gods with food, and that with might aidg thee,
7 Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station: so shall we slay a multitude of foemen.
prospered, the Asuras were defeated. In that he puts down the Aksnayastomiyas in one place after
8 So may the Maruts, armed with mighty weapons, rest here on heaven and earth with hearts in
11. The plants that have been bought, that are right potent, and are praised, shall protect in this village cow,
1. HELPED, Indra Maghavan, by thee in war of old, may we subdue in fight the men who strive with us,
Gleaming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, after your wont ye whirl about your weapons.
8 To meet her glance all living creatures bend them down: Excellent One, she makes the light.
Nasatyas, wheresoe'er ye be, Heaven's Children, for him who is more liberal than the godless.
3 Leading, his band Indra encompassed Vrtra; weak grew the wily leader of enchanters.
5. That each may see the light, the bird brought us the guard of Law, the friend
bricks the Yajus is performed. The water bricks are seed; be puts down the water bricks; verily he places
became the intermediate hoof of the horse; in that he makes the horse advance, he wins the sacrifice
So, marking well, Controller of the Maruts grant us their blessings, for they are thy dearest.
says; for Soma has the atmosphere for its deity. 'Thou art the seat of Aditi. Sit on the seat of Aditi', he
d Homage to him who dwelleth in the cowshed, and to him of the house.
6 O fair of face, beautiful is thine aspect when, very near at hand, like gold thou gleamest,
powerful; by tribulation is he seized whose foe is superior to him; in that he offers to Indra, the freer
among the gods. If one fragment were lost, one month of the year would be omitted, and the sacrificer
among men. 'Thou art to be invoked at our sacrifices', he says; for him they invoke at the sacrifices.
9 Dawn with her white herd hath appeared, and in due time hath fire been placed.
Wise Agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether five-wayed, threefold, or seven-threaded.
sacrifice. Again this is the form of the sacrifice; verily he wins the sacrifice by its form. 'May for me the
s May that which is increased by the rain recognize thee.
The Sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman. May this your gift, ye Shakers, be distinguished.
then why is the sacrifice Indra's up to the completion?' they say. The sacrifice is the sacrificial body of
10 1 have obtained the horseless car of Asvins rich in sacrifice,
speech from above. Intermediately indeed [3] by means of a ten-nights' (rite) did Prajapati create
3. From the wind thy breath I have obtained, from the sun thine eye; thy soul I hold fast in thee: be together with
by the two (worlds) the seed he has impregnated. For a year to no man [2] should he descend in honour;
From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, send down on us a mighty flood of waters.
27 To Agni let us haste with lauds, the Guide of sacrificial rites,
Diminishing the days of human creatures, the Lady shines with all her lover's splendour.
2. To us the mighty, lying in all vital power, who resteth in the deep, who standeth in the east.
5 Mighty is Indra, yea supreme; greatness be his, the Thunderer:
he supports by it holy power. In that there is (an offering) to Visnu on three potsherds, and Visnu is the
7 Hear thou Syavasva while he sings to thee, as erst thou heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites.
8 Through longing for this sap of yours ye drink what brings ability,
3 Not for reward doth Pusan send his blessings, Bhaga, or Aditi: his garb is splendour.
When will ye yoke the mighty ass that draws it, to bring you to our sacrifice. Nasatyas?
15 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, and the blossomless,
In continuation to the previous verses, Shree Krishna declares that He is the source and the most vital ingredient of everything. The entire universe is an extension of His opulence. On Earth, He is the force behind both the non-living and the living. He is the mild and pure fragrance of the earth and the bright radiance of a flame. He is the life-force of all living creatures. The ascetics or sadhus consciously deny themselves of bodily pleasures and perform austerities for self-purification. Lord Krishna says He is indeed the force behind their capacity to do penance.
2. Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gyifts, true art thou,, lordly in thine act.
Strength with the jaws; the waters with the mouth; the Adityas with the hair; support with the lower lip;
3. A talisman tied to a reddish thread the active (seers) then do fasten on: may the fastenings render impotent the
You can make the blind see; and You can make the cripple walk.
Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders of the light.
million, and a hundred hundred thousand million; may these bricks, O Agni, be for me milch cows,
6. The earth that supports all, furnishes wealth, the foundation, the golden-breasted resting-place of all living
May both Nasatyas, Rudra, heavenly Matrons, Pusan, Sarasvati, Bhaga, accept us.
7 Come with the early-faring Gods, ye who are Lords of genuine wealth:
Indra produced one shape, Surya another: by their own power they formed the third from Vena.
Shines out, Immortal! in the midst of mortals, a sage, with wealth, with splendour and with glory.
gear; verily he offers what is approved by the wife. The share of the wife in the sacrifice makes a pair;
When moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely Suns.
Prepare oblation so that thou mayst have success. we crave the favouring help of Brahmanaspati.
41 Vibhindu, thou hast helped this man, giving him thousands four times ten,
11 Call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the foemen, those
create offspring; in that there is the Ilamda, they take away from the offspring which has been created
8 He who hath. overtaken Krvi with his might, and silenced Susna with deathbolts,When he supported yonder heaven and spread it out, then first the son of earth was born.
the Viçvajit with all the Prsthas, so that the sacrifice may have all its strength. Prajapati indicated the
Let us not anger Varuna, nor Vayu, nor him, the dearest Friend of mortals, Mitra.
3. With humble homage draw ye nigh; blend the libation with the curds:
inadvertently, in dream of when wide awake, O Lord! Please remove far away from us such unworthy
6 Far went our earlist invocation of the Gods, and won us glories that can never be surpassed.
4 For you these juices are poured forth that gladden and exhilarate,
2 Or, Indra, when with Ruma, Rusama, Syavaka, and Krpa thou rejoicest thee,
1. O VARUNA and Mitra, Surya spreading the beauteous light of you Twain Gods ariseth.
Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring make the voice swell, and generate abundance.
sacrifice, though desirous of accomplishing (the sacrifice), we did not accomplish (it)!-3. (If), when sacrificing with the fat (animal), when offering oblations of ghee with the spoon, when desiring to
4. (The gold) which king Varuna knows, which god Brihaspati knows, which Indra, the slayer of Vritra, knows, may
cast forward the omentum-forks of the gods; verily through him he casts them forward. He casts them
2 Soma and Rudra, chase to every quarter the sickness that hath visited our dwelling.
2. Thou as thy gift bestowest many hundred herds, yea, many thou-sands dost thou give.
9 Down to the water-Soma, rich in kine hath flowed with cows, with cows that have been milked.
6 Tear down the mighty ones. O Indra, hear thou us. For heaven hath glowed like earth in fear, O
For thee, the Heavenly, e'en the poor invoketh: may we this day, thy feast-companions, prosper.
With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle touch.
in motion. He makes the noise 'Him'; this is the yoking of speech. He makes the noise 'Him'; thus the
b O Agni, with the wives, in unison with the god Tvastr, drink the Soma, hail.
5 Suna and Sira, welcome ye this laud, and with the milk which ye have made in heaven
12 What is our wealth therefrom, and what our treasure? Tell us O Jatavedas, for thou
For unto you the drops proceed as waters gather to the vale.
4 And that Impetuous Hero, winner of the spoil, though he is far away, we call to succour us,
Where pious men extend their generations, before the Auspicious One for happy fortune.
2. Strong Agni is enkindled well, even as the horse that brings the Gods:
if he should not go to the wild beast's lair; to Agni, saviour from distress, (offering is made) on eight
1. MAY the God Savitar, rich in goodly treasures, filling the region, borne by steeds, come hither,
9. Send down the rain from heaven and make splendour upon the earth! Give us,
7 Mighty, with wondrous power and marvellously bright, selfstrong like mountains, ye glide swiftly on
Who, as with penfold of your arms, encompass round the realm of light.
sacrificial fee is a black hornless (cow). To Agni (he offers) on eight potsherds in the house of the leader
32 Drive from us with thy tongue, O God, the man who doeth evil deeds,
4. Do thou, O lord of vows, adorned with vows, ever benevolently here shine! May we all, adoring thee, when thou
3. These Soma juices shall pour forth all treasures for the worshipper,
10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva at the sacred feast, to Dirghanitha thine home-friend,
9 Thou, called on as Sarasvati by Fathers who come right forward to our solemn service,
13 What newest of imploring prayers shall, then, the zealous mortal sing?
offerings [1] he makes; the quarters are four, the intermediate quarters are four; verily from the quarters
4 Your grace be with us, ye who love sweet juices: further the hymn sung by the poet Mana,
these words he puts down) on the right shoulder; (with) 'The ram in strength', on the left; verily he puts
23 Smooth and troublefree be the paths on which our well-wishers travel to attend the wedding
4 Bright Agni, they who deck their songs for thee have horses as their meed.
performed over and above it; verily he mounts at the end the whole extent of the sacrifice. (He strokes)
Upon thee, that holdest nourishment, prosperity, food, and ghee, we would settle down, O earth!
2 Forth go in rapid flight thy whirling weapons: follow them closely, glowing in thy fury.
1. MAY the wind blow upon our Cows with healing: may they eat herbage full of vigorous juices.
And brave men in the fightwhere heroes conquer, O Earth, have known you well and paid you honour.
7 Ten sister maids of slender form seize him within the press and hold
And do ye, O Çuna and Sira, accord prosperity to us.
(Saman), this world is connected with the Rathantara; verily he conquers this world. He divides it thrice;
As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the branch, O Maghavan.
r Thou, who art like a mighty man who slayeth with the dart
56. In the villages and in the wilderness, in the assembly-halls that are upon the earth; in the gatherings, and in
6 Hence men invoke thee, Indra, in the tumult of battle, in the light-bestowing conflict.
were made to swell; for him who knows thus the quarters are made to swell. One knows Prajapati,
2. Each day would I enrich the man who sang my praise, in whatsoever place he were.
Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness: win quickly with our meath that meath in battle.
brilliant. 'Thou didst come thundering from thy mothers', he says; his mothers are the plants; verily from
8 Praised by the Angirases he slaughtered Vala, and burst apart the bulwarks of the mountain.
2.2.6.11 Mantra 11: The Mantras of the Hotr at the Samvargesti
1. The Somas skilled in song, the waves have led the water forward, like
that is why the Agrayana has its name [2]. Therefore in the Agrayana speech is uttered. In that the
that.' He replied, 'Before [2] a year is out it will grow up for thee.' Therefore before the year is out the
p Of the All-gods thou art the belly, giving splendour to me, be purified for splendour.
The warming-pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving-boards,-all these attend the Charger.
burned, have become devoid of strength. Those that are left and those that are not left do I destroy with my song,
should not choose a natural fissure, for that is the colour of guilt. He appealed to the trees, 'Take a third
1. DRIVE all our enemies away, O Indra, the western, mighty Conqueror, and the eastern.
3 With songs I call thee, Great and Wide, even as a cow to profit us,
5 The young and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered praise:
5 The vessel of the strong flows forth, the flood of meath, unto the Strong who feeds upon the strong,
Victor with Vayu where the herds are gathered, who leads with boldness on to higher fortune.
7 Like rays of Dawn, the visitors of sacrifice, they shine with ornaments as eager to be bright.
7 May they give bliss to aid us well, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman:
12 Now, O Adityas, grant to us the shelter that lets man go free,
1. CHEIF Priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass at sacrifice:
The senses are like wild horses that have been newly harnessed. They are impetuous and reckless, and hence, disciplining them is an important battle that sādhaks have to fight within themselves. Therefore, those desirous of spiritual growth should carefully strive to tame the indulgent senses, which are colored with lust and greed, or else they have the power to sabotage and derail the spiritual process of even the most well-intentioned yogis.The Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam relates a story that perfectly illustrates this statement (canto 9, chapter 6). There was a great sage in ancient times, known as Saubhari. He is mentioned in the Rig Veda, where there is a mantra called Saubhari Sutra. There is also a scripture called the Saubhari Samhita. So he was not just an ordinary sage. Saubhari had attained such control over his body that he used to submerge himself in the river Yamuna and meditate under water. One day, he saw two fish mating. This sight carried away his mind and senses, and the desire for sexual association arose in him. He abandoned his spiritual practice and came out of the water, wondering how to fulfill his desire.At that time, the king of Ayodhya was Mandhata, who was a very illustrious and noble ruler. He had fifty daughters, each more beautiful than the other. Saubhari approached the king and asked for the hand of one of the fifty princesses.King Mandhata wondered about the sanity of the sage and thought to himself, “An old man wanting to get married!” The king knew Saubhari to be a powerful sage, and feared that if he refused, the sage might curse him. But if he consented, the life of one of his daughters would be ruined. He was in a dilemma. So he said, “O holy one! I have no objection to your request. Please take a seat. I shall bring my fifty daughters before you, and whosoever chooses you will become yours in marriage.” The king was confident that none of his daughters would choose the old ascetic, and in this way, he would be saved from the sage’s curse.Saubhari was all too aware of the king’s intention. He told the king that he would return the following day. That evening, he used his yogic powers to turn himself into a handsome young man. Consequently, when he presented himself at the palace the next day, all the fifty princesses chose him as their husband. The king was bound by the word he had given and was compelled to marry all his daughters to the sage.Now the king was concerned about the fights that would take place amongst the fifty sisters, since they would have to share a husband. However, Saubhari again used his yogic powers. Putting the king’s apprehension to rest, he assumed fifty forms and created fifty palaces for his wives, and lived separately with each one of them. In this manner, thousands of years passed by. The Puranas state that Saubhari had many children from each of them, and those children had further children, until a tiny city had been created. One day, Saubhari came to his senses, and exclaimed, aho imaṁ paśhyata me vināśhaṁ (Bhāgavatam 9.6.50) [v51] “O humans! Those of you, who make plans to attain happiness through material acquisitions, be careful. Look at my degradation—where I was and where am I now. I created fifty bodies by my yogic powers, and lived with fifty women for thousands of years. And yet, the senses did not experience fulfillment; they only kept hankering for more. Learn from my downfall and be warned not to venture in this direction.”
5. Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor's ever-conquering wealth,
measured, the Brhat the unmeasured; verily he cuts him off from the measured and the unmeasured.
would be unrestrained; if she were bound by the foot, she would be the funeral cow, and the sacrificer
races.' The fire of the five layers is the fire of the five races; therefore he speaks thus. He puts down the
until the conclusion, the heads would be exhausted; in that he offers the animals, he wins thereby
12 The warrior host, the Bharatas, fared over the singer won the favour of the Rivers.
And Trasadasyu when the forts were shattered down,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
colours to Indra; in the autumn in the after noon the white (beast) to Brhaspati. These are the brilliances
26 For men's oblations brought to him who is the mighty Lord of all,
Ordainer of the days nights, Lord over all who close the eye.
1. WHERE Heaven and Earth combine in men's assembly, and ttose who love the Gods delight in
the lovely goddess that bore Indra come to us, endowed with lustre!
beans, vetches, wheat, lentils, Millet, Panicum miliaceum, Panicum frumentaceum, and wild rice
But one who yokes the bright-hued steeds, the Etasas, even Indra yoker of the Bays.
To the chariot he made obeisance, to the horses he made obeisance; as the chariot with the horses (made
5 We have beheld the brightness of her shining; it spreads and drives away the darkiorne monster.
2 Whom, served with sacrificial oil like Mitra, men presenting gifts
24 He, Pavamana, hath produced the lofty Law, the brilliant light,
Agni, the youngest; verily he has recourse to Agni, the youngest, with his own share; verily thereby he
4. We call upon that Indra who, most active, ever slays the foe
4 Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the strong, the guardian Lord,
14. Stride away (O spell), like a loudly braying she-ass, that has been loosened (from the tether); reach those that
above, thought', (with these words he puts down) above; verily with these he supports speech. Ten by
May. Indra give them back to us, and Agni drive them hither-ward.
Soma an oblation; in that it is (offered) to Agni, thereby he bestows brilliance upon him; in that it is
art of a thousandfold strength; do thou quicken me; thou art of butter the butter; thou art of truth the
13. Slain are they that are striped across, crushed are the adders! Slay thou the one that produces a hood, (slay)
7. He swallows her (the cow), bristling with a hundred hooks, (but) is unable to digest her, he, the fool who,
3 To him these ladles go, to him these racing mares: he only will give ear to all the words I speak.
Bow lowly down; be easy to be traversed stay, Rivers, with your floods below our axles.
3 Lord of swift bounty, he will win e'en with a steed of worthless sort.
17 They deck him at his birth, the lovely Infant, the Maruts with their troop adorn the Car-horse.
6. This Agni is the Lord of great prosperity and hero, strength,
4 He, visible o'er all the earth, stablished the quarters of the sky:
Usnihs, Panktis, Aksarapanktis, these various metres he puts down; cattle are various, the metres are
having established a fire has no retinue; cattle indeed are the retinue of a Brahman. Having sacrificed, he
5. By means of thee I shall conquer the enemy, as Indra (conquered) the Sâlâvrikas. Overcome the debate of
drinks away the ghee; ghee is life, gold is ambrosia; verily from the ambrosia he drinks away life; it is a
3 Go to the reservoir, O ye Adhvaryus worship the Waters' Child with your oblations.
20 Indra is Vrtra's slayer, man's sustainer: he must be called; with fair praise let us call him.
10 With lauds and songs of praise we call them down to us, that they, most rich, may succour us;
3 Travelling on the paths of air's midregion, no single day doth he take rest or slumber.
7 One who does not know the way should enquire of one who knows. Directed by the instructor he
4 Thou, Jatavedas, seekest not the worship of a hostile man,
p Homage to the famous, and to him of a famous host.
None stay that act of thine when thou wouldst fain give wealth to one like me who sings thy praise.
13 Make for the Holy Gods a hymn that is not mean, but well-arranged and fair of form.
A Priest with purifying tongue, O Agni, sacrifice with thy mouth to thine own body.
14 O Hero Agni, Lord of men, on hearing this new laud of mine,
children; he is extended with offspring, with cattle, that measure he attains which they attained, who
May Visnu give felicity, and Pusan, the Air that cherisheth our life, and Vayu.
He.glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and like a playful horse the Tawny Steer hath run.
In Sanskrit, all letters are formed by combining a half-letter with “a.” For example, क् + अ = क (k + a = ka). Hence, the letter “a” is the most important in the Sanskrit alphabet. “A” is also the first vowel of the alphabet, and since the vowels are written before the consonants, “A” comes at the very beginning. Although Sanskrit is such an ancient language, it is highly refined and sophisticated. A common procedure in Sanskrit language is to combine words to form compound words. When, in the process of making one compound word, two or more words give up their case endings, it is called samāsa, and the resulting word is called samāsa pada, or compound word. There are primarily six kinds of samāsa: 1) dwandva, 2) bahubṛihi, 3) karm dhāray, 4) tatpuruṣh, 5) dwigu, 6) avyayī bhāv. Amongst these, dwandva is the best because both words remain prominent in it, while in the others, either one word becomes more prominent, or both words combine together to give the meaning of a third word. The dual word Radha-Krishna is an example of dwandva. Shree Krishna highlights it as his vibhūti. Creation is a magnificent act and awesome to behold. Humankind’s most sophisticated and technologically advanced inventions pale in comparison. Therefore, Lord Krishna singles out the first-born Brahma, who made the entire universe, and says that amongst creators, the creative ability of Brahma best reflects the glory of God.
superior to another prince. Now Agni is death, gold is immortality; he puts a gold plate within; verily he
Blowing away with supernatural might from earth and from the heavens the swarthy skin which Indra
May Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron is made hot; I will proclaim it.
'Thou art the body of Soma; guard my body.' He approaches his own deity; verily also he invokes this
3 For beauty ye have swords upon your bodies. As they stir woods so may they stir our spirits.
Yonder sun did not shine, the gods sought an atonement for him, for him they offered this oblation to
Thou art the western quarter, the forward by name; of thee as such [1] Soma is the overlord, the viper,
resulted for thee. To thee heaven and earth together with the revatî and sakvarî-stanzas shall yield gifts at will!
The Aditya (cup) is cattle; he-draws after covering (the cup); verily he draws securing cattle for him.
4 Vouchsafe us now that opulence, O Indra, as guerdon won by mightiest donation.
Agni, the overcomer [3], to Agni with the face. In that he offers to Agni, the forward, he repels thereby
11 Neither the right nor left do I distinguish, neither the cast nor yet the west, Adityas.
5 Indu, Wealth-giver, with thine help pour out for us a hundred, yea,
1. Indra and Agni, these our songs of praise have sounded forth to you:
May he, with the Varutris, be our refuge, may bountiful Tvastar give us store of riches.
2 Radiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning strength, Truth based upon the statute that
7 Bounteous are these, Angirases, Virupas: the Asura's Heroes and the Sons of Heaven.
leave out the day. The Samnayya is the fourth pressing. Because there is the Samnayya, they do not
3 What to the envoy Agni in reply ye spake, A courser must be made, a chariot fashioned here,
For have not they who laud his might, and Indra-power won for themselves the light of heaven?
6 Soon as the holy beings had discovered the thrice-seven mystic things contained within thee,
third pressing. Verily he sets gods against gods [6], the sacrifice against the sacrifice, speech against
The press-stones chew and crunch thee on the ox's hide: sages have milked thee with their hands into
8 The Gods, adored with brilliant fires. have granted precious wealth to us
2. Come hither, bring the Gods to us to taste the sacrificial feast,
10. To the gold-complexioned, lovely one, who rests upon golden cushions, to the great one, to that Arâti who
Those whom the gods magnified and those who magnified the gods;
Behold the Gods' high wisdom in its greatness: he who died yesterday to-day is living.
Trayastrinça (Stoma), for support. There is an Agnistoma with the Pañcadaça (Stoma), to obtain
2. Making the light that shines from heaven thou flowest on to every form,
Worship the Gods with most devoted spirit, a Priest with no unfriendly thought, O Agni.
1. Active, while being purified, he hath assailed all enemies: They deck the Sage with holy hymns.
From thee flows wealth, with heroes to adorn it, to the true-hearted man who gives oblation.
the fire approaches a woman; with clotted curds for Mitra and Varuna he should sacrifice; verily he
1. The Gods have come to Indu well-descended, beautified with milk,
13. Like fire (the spell) shall progress in the teeth of obstacles, like water along its course! As a chariot with easygoing wheels the spell shall turn back upon him that prepares the spell!
verily he splits him. He to whom the sacrifice does not come should offer a dwarf (beast) to Visnu; the
blessing. (Of the garment) the place where the border is belongs to Agni, the wind-guard to Vayu, the
for variety. He establishes with Darbha; verily winning it from the waters and the plants he establishes
the lighted (bricks); verily he confers light upon it; the fire blazes piled up with these (bricks); verily
O Indra, in thy members many powers abide, like wells surrounded by the ministering priests.
hiahest place), and Virâg, having become an embryo in the womb of immortality, having forsooth, become Indra,
9 They keep the twelve month's God-appointed order, and never do the men neglect the season.
To he invoked in war like Bhaga, Father, as 'twere, of hymns, fair, prompt to hear, strength-giver.
sprinkling of the butter. Then indeed did the gods see the sacrifice. In that he silently sprinkles, (it
for he is one who has taken the Vasativaris. He takes the Vasativaris; the Vasativaris are cattle; verily
heaven turning away (from earth) who perform the Prsthas in succession. The six-day (rite) is reversed
e The zenith of the quarters; the winter and the cool season of the seasons; Brhaspati the deity; radiance
'Restrainer'; the eye (with) 'the gliding'; the ear (with) 'the bestower of strength'. Now these offspring,
Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brought it as a son, our stay for ever.
4 For him the floods of heaven flow never failing down: first with the heroes he goes forth to war for
7 O Rudras, quickly we desire your succour for this work of ours.
We call on Aditi, Adityas, and the Gods, those who are on the earth, in waters, and in heaven.
is the abode of (the cup) for Indra and Vayu, the Agrayana is drawn on this (day); therefore (the cup) for
art the ender, thou art death! Thus do we know thee, O Sleep: do thou, O Sleep, protect us from evil dreams!
8 With might they drop the loosened rein so that the Sun may run his course,
1. If I, O Indra, were like thee, the single ruler over wealth.
6 Thou, grown at once to perfect strength, wast born to drink the Soma juice,
So might he bring-Lord also of the darkness-the light in heaven that I may see its beauty!
Mighty art thou, the wondrous herald of the Dawn. Let us not in thy friend. ship, Agni, suffer harm.
11 Meet for high praise, O Hero, is thy power, that with thy single wisdom thou obtainest wealth,
2. Cleansing the lives of men, thou, Steer, bellowing on the sacred grass,
Thou slewest noseless Dasyus with thy weapon, and in their home o'erthrewest hostile speakers.
Of those who gladly sought a hard-won dwelling he cast down many a thousand with his arrow.
4 Thy spirit, that went far away to the four quarters of the world,
7 Savitar thrice from heaven pours down abundance, and the fair-handed Kings Varuna, Mitra;
22. The enemy with coat-of-mail, he that has no coat-of-mail, and he that stands in the battle-throng, throttled by
24 Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, wherewith Most Blessed Savitar hath bound thee.
1. MAY Dyaus the Lord of lauded wealth, and Earth stand by the man who offers sacrifice,
14 In this thy friendship, and with thee to help us, fain to sacrifice,
Not me,-prepare thy pleasures with another: thy brother seeks not this from thee, O fair one.
honour. 'Thou art giver of life, O Agni; give me life', he says, for he is a giver of life. 'Thou art giver of
2. Agni the wise bestows the might of heroes grants strengthening food, preparing it for nectar.
Lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, subduing, as our help, e'en mighty foemen.
Thou shinest brightly forth, thou burnest to bestow: pervading sacrifice, thou lendest us thine help.
1. URGING to toil and making proclamation, seeking Heaven's Daughter comes the Mighty Mother:
That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for every one to whom the songs are suited.
Be thou most near to us for bliss, a Friend to aid.
Steeping the gift with oil diffusing purpose, bedew the Gods at chiefest time of worship.
1. THEE, Indra, we invoke, the Bull, what time the Soma is expressed.
5. Dawn drives away her sister's gloom, and through her excellence makes her retrace her path.
1. The poison infused by the serpent that is striped across, by the black serpent, and by the adder; that poison of
4 Your magic, Mitra-Varuna, resteth in the heaven. The Sun, the wondrous weapon, cometh forth as
on the gods. Them the cry of Indra with the Vasus repelled in front [4]; the swift of mind with the Pitrs
7 Seven holy singers guard with five Adhvaryus the Bird's beloved firmly-settled station.
Beloved of all, who knoweth all, the Priest, the Holy one, the SageAno Bhadraha Kritavayo Yantu Vishwataha (Let noble thoughts come from every side) – Rg Veda
12 Through these, ye Mighty Ones, come hither to my call which brings all blessings, wears all forms,Tlirough which, All-present Heroes, lavishest of food ye strengthened Krvi, come through these.
sacrificer with brilliance. 'Thou art of Indra', (with these words) he puts down the covering, for the seat
Sprung from one common Father, brothers, twins are ye; your Mother is in every place.
He, Son of Strength, the Holy, from a distance hath spread himself abroad with light like Surya.
Hymns, lauding manly valour, came inciting Indra to success, that ye may be unconquered, both thy bolt and
he were to set it up without strewing, it would be dug in and have the Pitrs for its deity; he sets it up after
those which are used once only the wild animals go to the forest; through those which are used again the
6 Lords of great riches, whether through the firmament ye fly or speed through heaven and earth,
Wake up intelligence, as when a lover wakes his sleeping love.
after they have been slain, dogs shall devour upon the ground!
Thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures, she poured for Nahusa her milk and fatness.
Ye rescued Vandana and raised him from the pit, and in a moment gave Vispala power to move.
Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage. In Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.
he unites him. 'In him establish the kingdom', he says; verily in him he makes the kingdom to abide. If
Enrich us, Master of the house: thou art the Giver of our wealth.
2. The road by which the Asvins carried away as a bride Sûryâ, Savitar's daughter,'by that road,' Bhaga (fortune)
Though mortal men on every side invoke thee, still give thine ear to us, O All-impeller.
When the kine haste to us, and when they harness the fleet-foot mettled stallion for the battle.
3. Through (the gift of) a cow with broken horns his (cattle) breaks down, through a lame one he tumbles into a
6 As, Heroes, in the olden time the Rsis called you to their aid,
the porridge which the two divinities (the sacrificer and his wife) are here preparing for us shall take note of our
3. From thee, a bull but newly born, O Agni, the kindled everlasting flames rise upward.
2 Thou mighty Conqueror of hostile armaments, O Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.
bring prosperity to us from the world of the Fathers; may I come to my (departed) kin, and not lose heaven!
Approve whatever words I speak, dependent on thee, and grant me thy divine protection.
he should stroke the white horse, when about to put down the mortar he should stroke the black; verily
20 Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyoked, like coursers started in the contest,
The dust of trampling horses rose to heaven, and Svitri's son stood up again for conquest.
To Agni of the front the red-limbed ox; the two spotted below for Savitr; the two red-navelled for Pusan;
27 Even from far away our songs reach thee, O Caster of the Stone:
pain. He goes round thrice, moistening; the fire is threefold; verily he calms the pain of the whole extent
Yea, Heaven and Earth have not surpassed this Youthful One in glorious fame.
knows thus. He should give her to the Agnidh, or the Brahman, or the Hotr or the Udgatr, or the
4 Come hither, answer thou the song, sing in approval, cry aloud.
Others here claiming friendship to their friendship, devoted unto thee, in thee were joyful.
4 With thee, O India, for ally with missile-darting heroes, may
7 Him here, the Child whom streams have borne, the ten swift fingers beautify
4:In company with Indra come ye to the juice, then gloriously shall your wishes be fulfilled.
c Join ye rich ones with the moving ones, sweet ones with the sweet.
1. I PRAISE the God of wondrous might like Indra, the lovely pleasant Guest whom all must welcome.
Agni, rich in light' [2], he says; verily he bestows light upon him. With his body he injures him whom he
2. Rudra has broken your necks, ye Pisâkas: may he also break your ribs, ye spooks! The plant whose power is
r Rich in cattle, in sheep, O Agni, in horses, is the sacrifice,
g O Agni, lord of the house, with thy ghee portion do thou vouchsafe strength and force to him who
3 Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald's voice, and, meet for worship, go each morning to the
2 O Sinivali, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvati:
that give abundant gifts, the thrice seven Maruts, who take delight in sweet (nourishment)!
4 Making them known to spacious earth and heaven, the holy Ones revealed the powers of Rudra.
verily he makes him a skin by means of his own deity and cattle; he does not become a leper. He who
These holy songs he taught the bard who gaised him, and widely spread these Dawns' resplendent
Agni and Visnu he appropriates the gods and the sacrifice of his enemy, his pairing cattle with (the
7 Him too our hymns delight, that yoke swift horses, like mother cows who lick their tender youngling.
To Agni he made obeisance; to the earth he made obeisance; as Agni with the earth made harmony, so
9. (We know) thee whom Ikshvâku knew of yore, whom the women, fond of kushtha, knew, whom Vâyasa and
The cows performed that Sattra, being hornless, with the desire, 'May horns be born to us.' For ten
which they have put -into the house, that do I hurl back again.
2. The gift that has come to me by sacrifice, or without sacrifice, bestowed by the Fathers, granted by men,
7 Wise, with your Law and through the Asura's magic power ye guard the ordinances, Mitra-Varuna.
2. Indra, these Somas with their lauds have been prepared for thy delight.
the offering'. In that he produces the fire after offering the beast, he brings forth all the gods for the
seat of Aditi; do thou sit on the seat of Aditi', he says; that is according to the text. Hitherto the sacrificer
8 Praise thou the Maruts' company, the valorous and truly strong,
8 That so this man well skilled, may pay worship to all the Holy Ones.
5 I singly have sinned many a sin against you, and ye chastised me as a sire the gambler.
fixed on all sides to the ukkhishta as the (spokes of the) wheel to the nave.
First help thou on to strength the man who strives to win, and aid our laud, O Ancient One.
24 These men, the sons of Bharata, O Indra, regard not severance or close connexion.
No kinship is there better, Maghavan, than thine: a father even is no more.
him with the Puronuvakya, leads him forward with the Yajya, and makes him go with the Vasat call. He
6. Bring hither, O chanter, thy poem, that which earns cattle and earns good things! Among the gods (kings) place
Vouchsafe them ample room, far off be danger. Through grace of Heaven and Earth may we be happy.
The Mighty Men have dressed the spotted bullock. These were the customs in the days aforetime,
smites away the Raksases. He places the kindling-sticks erect; verily from above he smites away the
His are the oblations of mankind when offered up at Ili's place.
have no share in it! May Agni as my guardian, may all the Maruts, and all the gods watch over the cooked food!
the metres; wisdom resorts to him. These (offerings) also should he make [5] who desires brilliance; the
our domestics; may not, ye gods, the pigeon here do harm to us!
2. Praise him who sends us wealth, prompt with his liberal boons Good 4re the gifts that Indra gives.
6. With the strength of Kâma, Indra, king Varuna, and Vishnu, with the impelling force (savena) of Savitar, with the
25 For thee, O Lord of Light, are shed these Soma-drops, and grass is strewn
2 Hither is come the Rbhus' gift of riches; here was the drinking of the well-pressed Soma,
With the western quarter I place thee [2], with the Jagati metre, with Savitr as the deity; with the tail of
7 O God! Forgive me if I have ever committed sin against a benefactor, a dear friend, a companion, my
pathway,Entrust this man, O King, to their protection, and with prosperity and health endow him.
Thou gavest Navavastva. as a present, to the great father gavest back his grandson.
us, may his evil deeds be firebrands to him, may the heavens surround with fire the hater of holy practices!
(Stoma) [2], for the winning of food; verily also by it they are propagated. There is an Ekavinça
Him only we invoke for help in battles whether great or small be he our aid in deeds or might!
11 Inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious Hero truly brave.
those worthy of sacrifice are the gods; verily he sacrifices to the deities according to their portions.
12. Long-lived, a hundred autumns old, do I wear this varana: kingdom and rule, cattle and strength, this shall
Enveloped in a cloud he rushed upon him. Indra subdued the foe with sharpened weapons.
Without or steed or chariot were the fellies which, sped by Indra, rolled upon the Dasytis.
As are men, so were the gods in the beginning. They desired, 'Let us strike off the misfortune, the evil of
produces, and in offspring when produced by Kuhu he places speech. These (offerings) also should he
3 The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away,
The Maruts have obtained bright strength, a sacred name, strength that destroys the Vrtras, strength
oblations acceptable; the gods rejoice in his oblation. The gods discussed regarding holy power; the
to the world of heaven?' The Adabhya is the taking alive; he draws from (the Soma) before pressing;
Let not our household gear be found defective. Sharpen us with thy penetrating splendour.
Wherewith he freely grants his worshiper defence. This with his rays the Great God hath vouchsafed to
7. The spell which they have put for thee into the army, that which they have put into the arrow and the weapon,
1. Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside the flowing juice?
Sodaçin; in that there is a sixteenth Stotra and a sixteenth Çastra, therefore is it the Sodaçin, and that is
Though she is black of hue with milk she teemeth, nutritious, brightly shining, all-sustaining.
9 Dear, grateful to the Gods, on to the beaker moves Soma, sweet to Indra, to delight him.
He works among the Gods, he works in hero strength, yea, also in the praise of men.
4 May they mark out our paths to bliss, Indra, the Maruts, Pusan,
1. SING ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, Lord of Tawny Steeds,
Of deep devotion, ne'er subdued, bringer of glory to his sire.
Wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, and nine-and-ninety flowing streams of water.
r Homage to you dogs, and to you, lords of dogs, homage!
19 Enclose thee in the heart of Khayar timber, in the car wrought of Sinsapa put firmness.
12 Ill be it for the demons' friend to find us or come near to us.
10 Over all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold.
makes this libation to have an abode; he wins that for desire of which he makes this offering. The fire is
1. PRESSED is the juice divine with milk commingled: thereto hath Indra ever been accustomed.
1. ON flows the potent juice, sustainer of the heavens, the strength of Gods, whom men must hail with
2 Mighty in mind and power is Visvakarman, Maker, Disposer, and most lofty Presence.
7. When the constellations fade away, and when the dawn does fade away, (then) shall he shine away from us
5 Here-, Courser, are the places where they groomed thee, here are the traces of thy hoofs as winner.
9 For, Agni, Lord of sacrifice and messenger of men art thou:
6. Men call on Indra in the armed encounter that he may make the hymns they sing decisive.
8 Lead us to meadows rich in grass: send on our way no early heat:
1. O Dawn who hast a store of wealth, bring unto us that splendid gift
4.19.54Sukta 54 – Prayer to Kala (Time), personified as a Primordial Power
twelve syllables, it is a Jagati. This Rc indeed is all the metres. In that he consecrates him with this Rc,
23 Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the tenth time still is new,
4 These gladdening drops, O Indra, Self-sustainer, quaffed shall augment thee in thy mighty splendour.
Apart yon flame-hued vault of heaven, lovely beyond the thought of man.
But, smitten through, the mastery thou wonnest, and with thy bolt the Dasa's head thou crushedst.
6 Do thou, O Savitar, from heaven thrice hither, three times a day, send down thy blessings daily.
create offspring, win offspring, procure offspring, and possess offspring. There is an Atiratra with the
Our flood may not be stayed when urged to motion. What would the singer, calling to the Rivers?
3 If, Dawn, thou Goddess nobly born, thou dealest fortune this day to all the race of mortals,
Do thou, O drum, in unison with Indra and the gods [6],
6. The godless mortal gaineth not this food, O thou whose life is long!
the sun; that is their share; verily thereby he delights them. If he desire, 'May Parjanya rain' [5], he
1. O SAPIENT man, call the Two Gods, the very wise, who slay the foe.
Ye have held fast the unimpeded whiteness within these many-coloured moving creatures.
4 Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth to us, Immortal God.
truth; verily with truth which is sacred order he seizes it. He winds (the rope) round transversely, for
Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, or sully and pollute our holy worship.
Here in the neighbourhood they cry unto the Sun at morning and at evening, like swift birds of prey.
5 Him Atri, Agni, have our songs Strengthened according to his sway:
The theologians say, 'Since they do not offer to any deity, then what deity has the stream of wealth?'
Bringing to light the Two great Regions limitless, moving above them he gained sheen that never fades.
2. Let not thy bounteous gifts, let not thy saving help all fail us good Lord, at any time!
4 When they had served with zeal at sacrifice as priests, they, mortal as they were, gained immortality.
12 Now let the heaving earth be free from motion: yea,- let a thousand clods remain above him.
20 Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man for whom I dig:
brilliance. He unites him with the hairs of a black antelope skin [2]; the black antelope skin is the
gangida, hurl away from here poverty, as an archer an arrow!
(when we were) with Kaurama among the Rusamas,-2. Whose twice ten buffaloes move right along, touether with their cows; the height of his chariot just misses the
victim, eats his flesh, who eats his sacrificial cake, eats his brains, who eats his fried grain, eats his
4.4.19 Sukta 19 – Mystic Power of the Apamarga plant, against Demons and Sorcerers
Thou, Brahmanaspati, the Brahman finding wealth: thou, O Sustainer, with thy wisdom tendest us.
9 O Asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, ye who are Lords of plenteous wealth,
Who steals the milch-cow's milk away, O Agni,-tear off the heads of such with fiery fury.
33 O Vrtra-slayer, thou art he who drinks these drops of Soma: come
11 He beautifies himself through the sheep's long fine wool, like an impetuous steed in war,
When, hasting through the region with the stamp of hoofs, our swift steeds trample on the ridges of the
8 The foeman's sinful enmities, Indra and Agni, vex me sore.
6 These have passed all in glory, who, the manly, have wrought with skill the hymn of adoration;
46. The broad (directions) where the fagots that fence in (the fire), the earth turned itself into a fire-altar. There
3. Do ye, strong Maruts, children of Prisni (the cloud), allied with Indra, crush the enemies! Rohita shall hear you,
Samnayya; on the new moon he should sacrifice with clotted curds for Mitra and Varuna. On the full
O Agni, with the concluding bath have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the barren cow have I obtained;
Yea, passing glorious must be your warrior might, not as a guileful mortal's strength.
2 O Maruts, rich in water, strengtheners of life are your strong bands with harnessed steeds, that
unifying (bricks); verily having deposited in him the breaths he unifies them with the unifying (bricks);
2. May (the takman) that returns on the morrow, he that returns on two (successive) days, the impious one, pass
The Sun's eye moves encompassed by the region: on him dependent rest all living creatures.
2 Man's Friend, to this our sacrifice he cometh marking how he is called by Soma-pressers.
3 O Lord of this dwelling! May we be possessed of a comfortable, delightful, opulent abode, granted by
4 Thinking of thee, O joyous One, as her who driveth hate away,
42. In reference to her the gods reflected: 'Is she a sterile cow, or not?' And Nârada in reference to her said: 'Of
He is their blame-averter, food-provider prepared is he and fit for deed of vigour.
5 She who is rich in spoil, the Spouse of Surya, wondrously opulent, rules all wealth and treasures.
1. Here present this immortal God flies, like a bird upon her wings,
21 Deft-handcd! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea.
14 So may the Rudras, Vasus, and Adityas accept the new hymn which we now are making.
20. The plants, that which was and shall be, day and night, the tree, the year along with the seasons, have sprung
I. Invite ye Indra with a song to drink your draught of Soma juicel
Wherewith, all-bounteous God, thou pourest riches, as fame wide-spreading, on the man who offers.
them made into an oblation. 'Rich in oblation be [4] the sun', be says; verily he takes them with light in
The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit adorn the car-horse in the resting-places.
Whereby the Holy Ones created for the God the light divine that ever wakes.
12 Right gladly would we set thee down, right gladly make thee burn and glow.
Soma flows on obtaining Indra's friendly love, and, as they purify him, settles in the jars.
2. They have been poured upon the Reece towards the meath-distilling vat:
5. Adityas, very mighty ones, grant to our children and our seed
Pusan', he says, for support. The Soma is cattle, the Upançu pressing-(stone) is cross breathing; in that
n The foe who, O Indra and Vayu, is hostile to us,
2 Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious plant,
19 Tvastar the God, the omniform. Creator, begets and feeds mankind in various manner.
17 Thou art renowned as giving wealth to every one in all the battles that are fought.
5 The Maruts, Friends of men, are glorious as the fire: their mighty and resplendent succour we
16 At this my call, O Agni and Parjanya, help, swift to hear, my thought and our laudation.
delighted with Soma, thee whom I have gladdened with Soma. May I be possessed of fair offspring with
14 To Visnu rich in marvels, songs And praises shall go as singers on the road of Bhaga,The Chieftain of the Mighty Stride, whose Mothers, the many young Dames, never disregard him.
the ladle of the gods', he says, for he is the ladle of the gods. 'The bowl from which the gods drink', he
the sacrifice be practises witchcraft against him; Sarasvati has a portion of the butter; Sarasvati is
1. Unto long life and great delights, for ever unharmed and vigorous, do we wear the gangida, as an amulet
18 Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go fortli, O Soma, into Indra's throat.
12 May he assist us among all the tribes, and make the envier's praise devoid of light.
Gather up wondrous wealth, O Indra, daily. Loud may we speak, with heroes, in assembly.
9 These Bulls of thine, O Vayu with the arm of strength, who swiftly fly within the current of thy stream,
There are ten Pañcadaças; the bolt is fifteenfold [1]; verily they take away the bolt from their rivals. The
1. For so thou art the brave man's friend; a hero, too, art thou, and strong:
They perform (the rites of) the next days for rest, for safety. There are six-day periods. The year has six
10. The (soma-sacrifice) that lasts one night (ekarâtra), and that which lasts two nights (dvirâtra), the (condensed
Agni, this day to him who pays oblations bring the Gods who waken with the morn.
5 May he support in peace and win in battle: he masters both the hosts that meet together.
Releasing them from age with a loud roar he comes, filling them with new spirit, living, unsubdued.
5 These helped to might theYouthful One, high over all, invincible,
23 Thou flowest to enjoy the milk, and bringest valour, being cleansed:
he wins whatever brilliances there are [5]. They are offered in the course of the year; the year is the
speech; verily with speech he practises against him; the oblation is Brhaspati's, Brhaspati is the holy
6 Men honour him with stirring songs and magnify with solemn rites:
2. What is the word addressed to him, God great and excellently wise?
When thou with thy surpassing power smotest to death that guileful beast, lauding thine own supremacy.
10 May Tvastar send us genial dew abundant, wondrous, rich in gifts,
For thee all cows are milked to yield the Soma-milk, to yield the butter and the milk.
g O Brahman! Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest, thou art Savitr of true instigation. O Brahman!
d The north of the quarters; the autumn of the seasons; Mitra and Varuna the deity; prosperity the
No enemy-whom thou smitest downsubdueth thee, no enemy, whom thou smitest down.
2. He has come, he has gone forth, he has joined the community of the living. And he has become the father of
18 The priest, when seated, loudly calls you, Maruts, praising in song your universal bounty.
So he, who on this tenth day, the Avivakya, comes to grief, is left out. If one points out (an error) to one
When the Supreme Lord descends in the world, he has two kinds of forms—one is the material form that can be seen with material eyes, and the other is his divine form that can only be seen with divine vision. Thus, human beings do see him during his descension upon the earth, but they see only his material form. His divine form is not visible to their material eyes. That is the reason why souls in this material world cannot recognize God when he takes an Avatār on earth. Shree Krishna mentioned this in the ninth chapter, verse 11: “When I descend in My personal form deluded persons are unable to recognize Me. They do not know the divinity of My personality, as the Supreme Lord of all beings.” What people see is only the material form of the divine descension.The same theory applies to his cosmic form. In the previous two verses, Shree Krishna asked Arjun to see the cosmic form, but Arjun could see nothing because he had material eyes. The physical eyes are insufficient to see that universal form and the ordinary intellect is unequipped to comprehend it. Thus, Shree Krishna now says that he will grant the divine vision with which it will become possible to behold the universal form with all its majesty.The granting of spiritual vision is an act of grace by the Supreme Lord. By his grace, God adds his divine eyes to the soul’s material eyes; he adds his divine mind to the soul’s material mind; he adds his divine intellect to the soul’s material intellect. Then, equipped with the divine senses, mind, and intellect of God, the soul can see his divine form, think of it, and comprehend it.
In his Friend's dwelling as a Friend he wanders: he, Vena, rests him on his golden pinion.
3 Both Heaven and Earth and Gods who should be worshipped establish thee as Priest for every
release thee. Guiltless do I render thee through my charm; may heaven and earth both be propitious to thee!
in that there is (an offering) on eleven potsherds, he bestows power upon him with the Tristubh; in that
2. Even as a youngling shouting with his mothers, the bounteous Steer hath flowed along with waters.
8 To thee for high dominion hath been for evermore, for slaughtering the Vrtras,
verily he repels those that are to be born. 'The forty-fourfold Stoma', (with these words he puts down) on
5. A friend we count thee, sharp-edged, thunder-wielder, Steer strong of body, overthrowing many.
for these two (worlds) descend in honour for no man; that is their rule. He who piles the fire without a
abode; to them he sacrifices when the next day comes. By means of a vow is Agni, lord of vows, pure,
they would. burn creatures. There are Parahsamans on both sides of the Divakirtya; verily they surround
17 Sing ye to him who must be praised, say lauds to him who must be praised,
7 As in a ship through billows, so through regions of air, with blessings, through toils and troubles
2. Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts! mighty art thou:
moon; they depart towards the east, closing their eyes [2]; therefore men do not see them as they go east.
Shree Krishna had previously used the expression yaḥ paśhyati sa paśhyati (they alone truly see, who see that…) Now He states that it is not enough to see the presence of the soul within the body. We must also appreciate that God, the Supreme Soul, is seated within all bodies. His presence in the heart of all living beings was previously stated in verse 13.23 in this chapter. It is also mentioned in verses 10.20 and 18.61 of the Bhagavad Gita, and in other Vedic scriptures as well:eko devaḥ sarvabhūteṣhu gūḍhaḥsarvavyāpī sarvabhūtāntarātmā (Śhwetāśhvatar Upaniṣhad 6.11)“God is one. He resides in the hearts of all living beings. He is omnipresent. He is the Supreme Soul of all souls.”bhavān hi sarva-bhūtānām ātmā sākṣhī sva-dṛig vibho (Bhagavatam 10.86.31)“God is seated inside all living beings as the Witness and the Master.”rām brahma chinamaya abināsī, sarba rahit saba ura pura bāsī (Ramayan)“The Supreme Lord Ram is eternal and beyond everything. He resides in the hearts of all living entities.”The Supreme Soul accompanies the individual soul as it journeys from body to body in the cycle of life and death. Shree Krishna now explains how realizing the presence of God in everyone changes the life of the sādhak.
7. Drive ye disease and strife away, drive ye away malignity:
deity, the All-gods, the deity, the Maruts, the deity, Brhaspati, the deity, Indra, the deity, Varuna, the
5 As thou art cleansed, O Wondrous Steed, O Soma, thou hast entered, like
prepared.--Push these (soma-) Shoots upon this red skin; the press-stone shall purify them as the washer-man
man, 'May he be without cattle', he should invoke the Ida indirectly for him; verily he becomes without
strength, I have taken away; moreover I have caused him to be crushed.
With Dyaus the Asura's Heroes I have lauded the Maruts as with prayer to Earth and Heaven.
has two feet; (verily they serve) for support. The theologians say [6], 'There are both Agni and Soma
Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your lauds repeatedly:
Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront of the Dawns he shines enkindled.
seized by destruction. On a place of sacrifice which is distinctly marked should he cause him to sacrifice
5 No evil spirits have impelled us, Indra, nor fiends, O Mightiest God, with their devices.
on twelve potsherds to the All-gods; verily he has recourse to Indra and the All-gods with their own
May Indra-Varuna with gracious favours work marvels for us in the stress of battle.
16 O Brahmanaspati, be thou controller of this our hymn, and prosper thou our children.
eleven potsherds; to Mitra and Varuna, saviours from sin, a milk offering; to Vayu and Savitr saviours
6 Thou with the sunlight of the great Impeller hast boldly over-spread the earth's expanses.
free from evil', he should run over all of them for him and make one offering; swiftly is he set free from
2. For him, strong, independent ruler, Heaven and Earth have fashioned forth with power and might.
When the Steed bringeth down your grace and favour in bodies dear and worshipful.
So now for new felicity flow onward: the waters follow as thy law ordaineth.
Now do we know his newest favour; may we gain a stable that is full of kine.
share your strength', he says [1], for they are strength. 'Ye wealthy ones, stay', he says; the wealthy ones
four; verily from the quarters he wins splendour [1]. There is an Agnistoma with the Trivrt (Stoma);
That of thine shineth like an ornament, O thou powerful one.
6 May he enjoy this hallowed gift, Agni accept our songs, who bears
2. Prepare not our bodies for the dog, or the jackal; for the aliklavas, the vultures, and the black birds! Thy greedy
1. COME hither, Maruts, on your lightning laden cars, sounding with sweet songs, armed with lances,
Soma of Tvastr; he went to pieces on all sides [3]; he found no stay in himself; he saw these cakes ,as an
a As of a thunder-cloud is the face of the warrior
recollect where it is; he steps on the fire-pan; verily he makes himself its overlord, for guardianship. Or
6 Such as thou art, brilliantly kindled for our weal, a liberal giver, send us riches in thy shine,
For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays, is fashioned. May we, car-borne, through song be victors ever.
Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless--may he protect our armies in our battles!
the western quarter; thou art the self-ruling, the northern quarter; thou art the lady paramount, the great
May Heaven and Earth, the all-pervading, love thee: worship the Gods to win for us their favour.
5 He who brings Guerdon comes as first invited: chief of the hamlet comes the Guerdon-bearer.
It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and as it moves the dust of earth is scattered.
5 None hinder me in mine heroic exploits, no, not the mountains when I will and purpose.
10 O Agni! Come and take your seat amidst us; hear the praise, and accept
Aditi is all Gods, Aditi five-classed men, Aditi all that hath been bom and shall be born.
7 O Heroes, ye gave wisdom to Kaksivan who sprang from Pajra's line, who sang your praises.
Yajya has four feet; verily he wins four footed cattle. The Vasat call has two syllables, the sacrificer has
Have mercy on us once, O Indra, Bounteous Lord: be thou a Father unto us.
light is yonder sun; verily he attains unity with the sun. The year lags not, his future fails not, for whom
verily he bestows upon him strength. Agni departed from the gods, he entered the Krumuka wood; he
g Thou art taken with a support; agreeable to Prajapati I take thee
gives on the strew, in his house before the year is out they weep; therefore one should not give on the
They go to the world of heaven who perform the Upasads. Of them he who takes out (a little food) is left
all this world.' They called to them, and they depositing their might in day and night came up to them.
should not draw (it) in the Ukthya; the Ukthas are offspring and cattle; if he were to draw (it) in the
17 Strengthen the Ruling Power, strengthen the men of war; slay ye the Raksasas and drive away
offer an oblation to Apam Napat; the horse has its birthplace in the waters; verily he makes him go to his
9 Agni, he dwells in rest and peace who smites and no one smites again:
All Gods of one accord, with one intention, move unobstructed to a single purpose.
containing the words 'depth' and 'top'; verily from the depths he led him to the top; for the prince who is
l Thou art a piler; in the manner of Angiras be firm with that deity.
not his abode. The sacrificial cake is the sacrificer, the oblations are cattle; in that he offers these
The Babe unborn increased through many autumns. I saw him born what time his Mother bare him.
thrive a hundred autumns; Agni shall be thy most excellent shepherd and overseer!
When will the Goddesses, the Immortal's Spouses, the Dawns, spread over us the Sun-God's
1. O INDRA, hear us. Raining down the Soma, we call on thee to win us mighty valour.
15. May the plants be auspicious to thee! I have raised thee from the lower to the upper earth: there may both the
And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of heavenly hosts that conquer and demolish.
joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the Lord Divine.
10 Let Agni -for he knows the way- conduct us to all that he enjoys of God-sent riches,
shall prosper! Cause me, that offers the oblation, to continue long beholding (light), and to rise to supremacy!
Those that inundate the earth with their sap [1], the pure ones
Whose high renown ye celebrate, and people praise each glorious deed.
Most skilful worshipper mid Gods and mortals, may he begin the sacrifice, the Holy.
Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him whose home is very strength!
a pair. That is the pairing of the fore-sacrifices. He who knows thus [4] is propagated with offspring,
With the northern quarter I place thee, with the Anustubh metre, with Mitra and Varuna as the deity;
mid-day pressure! Living in wealth, do thou bestow wealth upon us!
1. THIS Sage, exalted by our lauds, flows to the purifying cloth,
of the enemy, mount the Jagati metre, step along the sky, excluded is he whom we hate. Thou art the
four (verses); the. metres are four, Agni's dear body is the metres; verily he turns round on his dear body
form he wins Vaiçvanara. If he desire of a man, 'May he become hungry', he should put down for one (a
8 Krsa and Sayu ye protect, ye Asvins Twain: ye Two assist the widow and the worshipper;
10 They with their vigorous strength pushed the well up on high, and clove the cloud in twain though it
4 O Agni, graciously announce this our oblation to the Gods,
1. THE Thirty Gods and Three besides, whose seat hath been the sacred grass,
The archer boldly shot at him his arrow, and the God threw his splendour on his Daughter.
Brhati won them; there fore cattle are called connected with the Brhati [3]. 'Ma metre', (with these
14 Indra, what mortal will attack the man who hath his wealth in thee?
being thee, for not being thee; for the waters thee, for the plants for
We have served thee that thou mightest give much to us, yea, mightest quickly give great wealth.
4 Hero, let hostile spirits sleep, and every gentler genius wake:
2 So let the draught of joy, thy dear companion, by which, O Lord of Bays, thou slayest foemen,
Maruts; he whose ladle is made of Parna wood, and his spoon (upabhrt) is of Açvattha, by holy power
4 Thee, best of Vrtra-slayers, thee who shakest off our Dasyu foes:
b Thou art the thunderbolt of Indra, slaying obstructions, with thee may this one smite Vrtra.
5 Which, fair, unrobbed, the Falcon brought thee in his foot, the red-hued dwelling of the juice;
4 Eager to gain, we crave from him the friendly God strength confident, choiceworthy meet to be
12. Into thy rniddle set us, O earth, and into thy navel, into the nourishing strength that has grown tip from thy
He, quivering with alarm and terrified in heart before bow-armed Krsanu, holdeth fast the sweet.
connected with the All-gods; verily he has recourse to the All-gods with their own share; verily they
3 The insatiate one, extended, hard to waken, who slumbered in perpetual sleep, O Indra,The Dragon stretched against the seven prone rivers, where no joint was, thou rentest with thy thunder.
Will not the rapid Son of Waters make them lovely, for he it is who shall enjoy them?
21 Turn thee again Vrsakapi: we twain will bring thee happiness.
2. The earth that has heights, and slopes, and great plains, that supports the plants of manifold virtue, free from
3 So Trasadasyu served thee, God Most Youthful, craving thy favour for the ninth time, Agni;
3 On most auspicious path he goes to battle he toiled to win heaven's light, full fain to gain it;
the breaths are three; verily he conquers the breaths. (He rubs) the southern one thrice; these worlds are
of Nirrti; verily by her own form he propitiates Nirrti. They go to this quarter; this [2] is the quarter of
does not depart from Prajapati; in that it is offered on twelve potsherds, therefore he does not depart
9 So urge our hosts together in the combats: yield up the godless bands that fight against us.
d The fire is the year, its bricks are arranged threefold, those of Prajapati, of Visnu [2], of Viçvakarman;
a Thou art the ray; for dwelling thee! Quicken the dwelling. Thou art advance; for right thee! Quicken
16 Him, Sovran Ruler of all precious things, who even hath power o'er this fair form of his,
trunk and the head, four members, and the breasts as the eleventh and twelfth [3]. Therefore (the days)
3 Ten active fingers carefully adorn him here; they make him bright
o Homage to him who crosseth over, and to him who crosseth back.
bath, O flood', he says; verily he propitiates by this utterance Varuna. In the sea is thy heart, within the
bathing is fated to drown; (the son born) of one who [6] anoints herself has a skin disease; (the son born)
8 When the impetuous chief hath sought the confliet, and the lord looked upon the long-drawn battle,
Still pressing on, promoting, purifying, Agni the Holy One, the Lord of riches.
For from thy body thou hast generated at the same time the Mother and the Father.
has guarded the Soma. 'This, O god Savitr, is the Soma of you (gods)', he says; verily instigated by
Verses to bring the Thunderer to destroy the forts and sit on Kanva's sacred grass.
e Thou art the fetter of the strong steed; for rain I yoke thee.
6. The cows are ever pure and all-supporting, the Gods are ever free from stain and blemish.
twain! Discharge not your arrow even after it has been laid on (the bow), and has been drawn! Destroy not our
shuts himself away from death. 'He shuts himself away from death, and away from eating food', they
To him I show my ten extended fingers: I speak the truth. No wealth am I withholding.
Giving to me a thousand with their eightmarked cars, they gained renown among the Gods.
verily he places light in yonder world. Full of light become these worlds to him who knows thus. The
4 For Indra to the streams they drive the tawny rapture-dropping Steed,
wins cattle for him. The Brhati holds the sovereignty of the metres; he for whom these [4] are put down
5 There in the east half of the watery region the Mother of the Cows hath shown her ensign.
Whether of you confronts e'en great betrayal? Lovers of sweetness, Dasras, help and save us.
to the Unnetr.' This is left over of the thousand, and the Unnetr is the one of the priests who is left over.
Stomabhagas; in that [4] he puts down the Stomabhagas, the sacrificer creates offspring. In the
3 Unlike in form are the Red God's two Daughters: one is the Sun's, and stars bedeck the other.
5 When through the filter thou art poured, we clothe thee with a robe of milk
16 To him whose food and work is this, who comes to take his share therein,
10 As soon as thou wast born in highest heaven thou drankest Soma to delight thee, Indra;
The eternal nature of the soul has been established in this verse, which is ever-existing and beyond birth and death. Consequently, it is devoid of the six types of transformations: asti, jāyate, vardhate, vipariṇamate, apakṣhīyate, and vinaśhyati “Existence in the womb, birth, growth, procreation, diminution, and death.” These are transformations of the body, not of the self. What we call as death is merely the destruction of the body, but the immortal self remains unaffected by all bodily changes. This concept has been repeatedly emphasized in the Vedas. The Kaṭhopaniṣhad contains a mantra almost identical to the above verse of the Bhagavad Gita:na jāyate mriyate vā vipaśhchin nāyaṁ kutaśhchin na babhūva kaśhchitajo nityaḥ śhāśhvato ’yaṁ purāṇo na hanyate hanyamāne śharīre  (1.2.18) [v25]“The soul is not born, nor does it die; it did not spring from something, and nothing sprang from it. It is unborn, eternal, immortal, and ageless. It is not destroyed when the body is destroyed.” The Bṛihadāraṇyaka Upaniṣhad states:sa vā eṣha mahān aja ātmājaro ’maro ’mṛito ’bhayaḥ  (4.4.25) [v26]“The soul is glorious, unborn, deathless, free from old age, immortal, and fearless.”
instigated by Savitr, he purifies him. He says, 'O lord of the purifier, with thy purifier, for whatsoever I
4 For all men bring their will to him the Resolute, to him the Holy One, to him the Strong they cleave.
12 Flow to our sieve, a gladdening draught that hath most intercourse with Gods,
1. I WILL declare, while juices flow, the manly deeds that ye have done:
7 I call your Agni, from of old Invoking Priest of living men:
says thus. Speech aforetime spoke without discrimination; the gods said to Indra, 'Do thou discriminate
5 This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought together, like
Then to the singer give free way for sacrifice. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
Far from the sun keep those who hate devotion, the godless, prospering in their vocation.
Whom with good strength thou quikenest, with children and wealth-may we be they, Eternal Being.
3 By you, O Lords of ample wealth our songs of praise have been observed:
6 When sacred grass is trimmed to aid the auspicious work, or the hymn makes its voice of praise
Him only we invoke for help in battles whether great or small: be he our aid in deeds of might!
repelled thereby. That the gods prospered, the Raksases were defeated. He who has foes should in
Agrayana the twenty-sevenfold and the thirty-threefold (Stomas); from the twenty-sevenfold and the
3 Watchful among the. gods, this juice advances to the cleansing sieve
9 He with his potent Friends gave up the mighty, gave gusnia up to Kutsa for affliction.
8 O Indra-Varuna, - through our songs that seek to win you to ourselves,
Sped by the Hawk the drop hath waxed in waters: the father drains it, drains the Father's offspring.
9 When, O Nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither with our hymns,
verily by it he recognizes the quarters; 'May he bear this sacrifice for us, well knowing', he says, for
animals and the tribes of men, glorious in the lap of the earth, of Aditi: may I like Savitar be lovely!
1. Right here do I erect a firm house. May it stand on a strong foundation, dripping with prosperity (“ghee”). May
3 Here these our holy hymns with joy and gladness in pious emulation have approached thee.
from tribulation, he is freed thereby from tribulation; by foes is he beset, to whom one of his equals is
9 For verily thy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps at once
extend wide for thee', he says; verily he enriches the sacrificer with offspring and cattle. 'Thou art firm'
7 Tle gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish: the yellow dro s have urged the swift Bays to the
At the outset, Arjun was faced with a bewildering situation, and confused about his duty in the situation. Overwhelmed with sorrow, he had sat down on his chariot, andgaveup his weapons. He had confessed that he could find no remedy to the grief that attacked his body and senses. But he now finds himself completely transformed, and announces that he is situated in knowledge and no longer perplexed. He has given himself to the will of God and shall do what Shree Krishna instructed him to do. This was the impact of the message of Bhagavad Gita upon him. However, he adds tvat prasādān mayāchyuta, meaning, “O Shree Krishna, it was not just your lecture, but your grace that dispelled my ignorance.”Material knowledge does not require grace. We can pay the educational institute or teacher and receive knowledge in return, but spiritual knowledge can neither be purchased nor sold. It is offered through grace and received through faith and humbleness. Thus, if we approach the Bhagavad Gita with an attitude of pride, “I am so intelligent. I will evaluate what the net worth of this message is,” we will never be able to comprehend it. Our intellect will find some apparent defect in the scripture to dwell upon, and on that pretext we will reject the entire scripture as incorrect. There have been so many commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita and innumerable readers of the divine message in the last 5,000 years, but how many people have become enlightened like Arjun? If we wish to truly receive this knowledge, we must not merely read it, but also attract Shree Krishna’s grace with an attitude of faith and loving surrender. Then we will know the purport of the Bhagavad Gita by his grace.
9 One of you Twain destroys the Vrtras in the fight, the Other evermore maintains his holy Laws.
1. Here is my varana-amulet, a bull that destroys the rivals: with it do thou close in upon thy enemies, crush them
(they serve) to reveal the seasons. (The cups) for the Maruts are a weapon which the sacrificer hurls at
37. Lay (ghee) upon it, let it spread forth, anoint this dish with ghee! As the lowing cow her young that craves the
24 Burn thou the paired Kimidins, brun, Agni, the Yatudhana pairs.
6 Thine are two measures, Indra, wide-wellmeted, heaven for thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom.
He cherishes much wisdom, Sage, as heaven brings forth each varied form.
2 Kings, guards of rrtighty everlasting Order, come hitherward, ye Princes, Lords of Rivers.
goes to ruin; offspring are soothed where these are put down. The waters are the hearts of the waters; in
down the all-light (bricks); verily by them he makes these worlds full of light; verily also they support
3 For, verily, Pavamana, thou bast, splendidest, called all the generations of
12 May helpful Indra as our good Protector, Lord of all treasures, favour us with succour,
Doer of many deeds for man's advantage, like Soma quaffed, for friends we must invoke him.
3 Maghavan, we will reverence thee who art so fair to look upon.
2. Lord of the tawny, Indu, thou who art the Gods' most special food,
Nothing is done, even far away, without thee: great, wondrous, Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee.
3. O Indu, Soma, send us now great opulence from every side:
the vital airs. The pressing-boards are the jaws of the sacrifice; he does not join them, for the jaws are
2.2.4.12 Mantra 12: The Deity of the Offering of Three Constituents
full of sap. Soma was in the third sky from hence; the Gayatri fetched it, a leaf of it was cut off, that
One with his powers the universe regardeth: Of one, the sweep is seen, but his figure.
1. WHAT God, of those who hear, is he whose well-praised name we may record in this our sacrifice;
May these Streams give us ample room and freedom. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
the Ukthya that of the full moon sacrifice, the Atiratra that of the new moon sacrifice. He who knowing
1. As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, O Indra, both the earth and heaven.
2. Your hymns of pleasant sound, praiseworthy, fond of lauds, have come into the hall enclosed for
5. Impetuous, bright, have they come forth, unwearied in their speed, like bulls, driving the black skin
v From the depth to the top, sung by the Angirases,
propagation of pairing; with offspring, with cattle, with pairings is he propagated for whom these are put
pressing is connected with the Gayatri; verily thereby he obtains the morning pressing. (He presses)
unites him with brilliance and splendour [2]. He whose desire is not fulfilled should offer on eleven
10. Pain in the head, affliction in the eye, and ailment of the body, all that shall the kushtha heal-a divinely
4. Him that rivals us, or does not rival us, him that curses us with hate, may all the gods injure my charm protects
None hath surpassed thee in thy might, none with good steeds o'ertaken thee.
Four beakers let us make,- thus spoke the youngest. Tvastar approved this rede of yours, O Rbhus.
They made for us a way to reach high heaven, they found us day, light, day's sign, beams of morning.
8 And these ten steeds which Trasadasyu gives me, the goldrich chief, the son of Purukutsa,
Maghalan, urged by song, in the drink-offerer's house rejoice thee with the Heroes, with Sudhanvan's
4 Lord of the lofty sacrifice is Agni, Agni is Lord of every gift presented.
He formed the creatures of-the air, and animals both wild and tame.
7 To win us strength I glorify the Mighty Twain, Agni and Soma, Mighty Ones whom many laud.
16 Do ye, destroyers of the foe, worshipful and exceeding bright,
In the previous chapter, Shree Krishna had explained that all life forms are a combination of soul and matter. He had also elucidated that prakṛiti (material nature) is responsible for creating the field of activities for the puruṣh (soul). He added that this does not happen independently, but under the direction of the Supreme Lord, who is also seated within the body of the living being. In this chapter, he goes on to elaborate in detail about the three-fold qualities of material nature (the guṇas). By gaining this knowledge and imbibing it into our consciousness as realized wisdom, we can ascend to the highest perfection.
By paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send thou us happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee.
cake on eight potsherds; by the eye of Agni men see [1], (by the eye) of the sun the gods; verily he has
N. N.', he says; verily he takes his eating of food. With six (verses) he takes, the seasons are six; verily
21 In both your laps, ye guileless Ones, the Holy Gods shall sit them down
year; verily (these nights) are heavenly. There are the three days, Jyotis, Ayus, and Go. The Jyotis is this
Prajapati saw the Viraj; by it he created the past and the future; he concealed it from the Rsis; by
out, it has the lees (of the Soma); verily he makes all the pressings have stalks and pure Soma, and be of
Rāja means “king.” Shree Krishna uses the metaphor rāja to emphasize the paramount position of the knowledge He is going to reveal.Vidyā means “science.” He does not refer to His teachings as creed, religion, dogma, doctrine, or belief. He declares that what He is going to describe to Arjun is the king of sciences.Guhya means “secret.” This knowledge is also the supreme secret. Since love is only possible where there is a choice, God deliberately hides Himself from direct perception, thereby providing the soul the freedom to exercise the choice of loving Him or not. A machine cannot love, for it is devoid of choices. God wants us to love Him and so He gives us the option to choose Him or not, as we wish. He merely makes us aware of the consequences of what we choose, either way, and then leaves it to us to decide the path we wish to follow.Pavitram means “pure.” Knowledge of devotion is supremely pure because it is untainted by petty selfishness. It inspires sacrifice of the self at the altar of divine love for the Supreme Lord. Bhakti also purifies the devotee by destroying pāp, bīja, and avidyā. Pāp is the stockpile of past sins of endless lifetimes of the individual soul. Bhakti burns them up as a fire burns up a bundle of straw. Bīja refers to impurities of the heart, which are the seeds of sinful activities. If the seeds exist, then destroying the results of past sins will not suffice, for the propensity to sin will remain in the heart and one will sin again. Bhakti purifies the heart and destroys the seeds of sin, which are lust, anger, and greed. However, even the destruction of the seeds is not enough. The reason why the heart becomes impure is that there is avidyā (ignorance), because of which we identify with the body. Because of this misidentification, we think of the body as the self, and hence create bodily desires thinking they will give happiness to the self. Fulfillment of such material desires further leads to lust, anger, greed, and all the other impurities of the heart. As long as the ignorance remains, even if the heart is cleansed, it will again become impure. Devotion ultimately results in realized knowledge of the soul and God, which in turn destroys the ignorance of material existence. The benefits of bhakti are described in the Bhakti Rasāmṛit Sindhu as follows: kleśhas tu pāpaṁ tadbījam avidyā cheti te tridhā (1.1.18) “Bhakti destroys the three poisons—pāp (sins), bīja (the seed of sins), avidyā (the ignorance in the heart).” Only when the three are completely destroyed, does the heart become truly and permanently pure.Pratyakṣha means “directly perceptible.” The practice of the science of bhakti begins with a leap of faith and results in direct perception of God. It is not unlike the methodology of other sciences, where we begin an experiment with a hypothesis and conclude with a verified result.Dharmyam means “virtuous.” Devotion performed without desire for material rewards is the most virtuous action. It is continuously nourished by righteous acts such as service to the Guru.Kartum susukham means “very easy to practice.” God does not need anything from us; He is attained very naturally if we can learn to love Him.When this is the sovereign science and it is easy to practice, then why do people not apply themselves to learning it? Shree Krishna explains this next.
Jamadagni desiring prosperity, sacrificed with the four-night rite. He prospered therein, and accordingly
21 Soma , bestowing food upon our progeny, from every sides,
Wealth is Agni, this stream is his; wealth is Visnu, this stream is his; with a verse addressed to Agni and
running over troop by troop he offers; verily he makes the people obedient to him.
with the plant kingdom; Let us be in harmony with the forests. Let us be in peace and harmony with the Devas.
14 May this same fire of mine surpass all others, this fire where offspring, vigorous and firm-handed,
May he that waiteth on thee, O Agni, be not harmed;
8 As ministering Priests they held, by pious acts they won themselves,
41 Soma the Steer, in that as Child of Waters he chose the Gods, performed that great achievement.
7 Thou, Maghavan, from the first didst scatter foemen, speeding, while joying in the milk, the Giver.
2 The Son of Strength; for is he not our gracious Lord? Let us serve him who bears our gifts.
body; purify thyself for us! The earth is the mother, and I the son of the earth; Paro-anya is the father; he, too,
3 As such, lover of song, with songs, wealth-lover, giver of our wealth!
3. Harness thy pair of strong bay steeds, long-maned, whose bodies fill the girths.
holy order', he says; the circumference of holy order is the sky; verily he conquers the sky. 'Thee for the
2 A hundred necklets from the King, beseeching, a hundred gift-steeds I at once accepted;
4 Whate'er he meets he grasps and then runs farther on, and straightway, newly born,creeps forward
19 Hawk seated in the bowls, Bird wide-extended, the Banner seeking kine and wielding weapons,
6 Hitherward shalt thou bring these Gods to our laudation and to taste.
Even with us be thine auspicious friendships. Ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.
gods, by Soma the world of the Pitrs; in the north part he offers to Agni, in the south to Soma, for these
9 Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth, I took the Seven Rivers as mine own domain.
foul do we drive away from here; the auspicious ones, O Gâtavedas (Agni), do thou hold fast for us!
One hates thee, and another sings thy praises: I thine adorer laud thy form, O Agni.
10 Bristle thou up, O Maghavan, our weapons: excite the spirits of my warring heroes.
attains sovereignty. He puts down seven Valakhilya, (bricks) in the east, seven in the west; in the head
Vouchsafe us thoughts, for profit, as thou breakest. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
1. WHAT wish of Sarama hath brought her hither? The path leads far away to distant places.
4 Where are ye? whither are ye gone? whither, like falcons, have ye flown?
Gavisthira hath raised with prayer to Agni this laud far-reaching, like gold light to heaven.
to us, and carry the offering for us.' He said, 'Let me choose a boon; whatever of the offering when it is
11 Thou who hast covered heaven and earth with splendour and with thy glories, glorious and
Thou by attrition art produced as conquer.ing might, and men, O Angiras, call thee the Son of Strength.
And well knows sacrifice with adoration, gains every joy with thee to guard and help him.
horse has its birthplace in the waters, the reed is born in the waters; verily he establishes it in its own
6 Indra and Parvata, our champions in the fight, di ive ye away each man who fain would war with us,
b Offering to the gods, I seize thee with the noose of sacred order.
verily he delights the seasons; he offers three with Yajuses [1]; these worlds are three; verily he delights
r Thou, O Agni, hast attained the radiance of the sun, the praises of the Rsis, thy beloved abode.
3 Yea, Asvins, as a dead man leaves his riches, Tugra left Bhujyu in the cloud of waters.
m On the impulse of the god Savitr, with the arms of the Açvins,
against his cattle. The sacrificer is a bolt, the enemy of man is hunger; in that he fasts without eating, he
May all the Holy Ones of earth and heaven, and the Cow's offipring hear our invocation.
Wherewith ye set at liberty the swallowed quail,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
2 Agni, Eternal Father, offering- bearer, fair to behold, far-reaching, far-refulgent,
Savitr rules instigations; in that he draws (the cup) for the All-gods from the tub with the Savitr vessel,
The Vedas emanated from the breath of God:asya mahato bhūtasya ni śhvasitametad yadṛigvedo yajurvedaḥ sāmavedo ’thavaṅgirasaḥ(Bṛihadāraṇyak Upaniṣhad 4.5.11) [v9] “The four Vedas—Ṛig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda, Atharva Veda—all emanated from the breath of the Supreme Divine Personality.”In these eternal Vedas, the duties of humans have been laid down by God himself. These duties have been planned in such a way that through their performance materially engrossed persons may gradually learn to control their desires and slowly elevate themselves from the mode of ignorance to the mode of passion, and from the mode of passion to the mode of goodness. These duties are enjoined to be dedicated to him as yajña. Hence, duties consecrated as sacrifice to God verily become godly, of the nature of God, and non-different from him.The Tantra Sār states yajña to be the Supreme Divine Lord himself:yajño yajña pumāṁśh chaiva yajñaśho yajña yajñabhāvanaḥyajñabhuk cheti pañchātmā yajñeṣhvijyo hariḥ svayaṁ [v10]In the Bhāgavatam (11.19.39), Shree Krishna declares to Uddhav: yajño ’haṁ bhagavattamaḥ [v11]“I, the Son of Vasudev, am Yajña.” The Vedas state: yajño vai viṣhṇuḥ [v12] “Yajña is indeed Lord Vishnu himself.” Reiterating this principle, Shree Krishna says in this verse that God is eternally present in the act of sacrifice.
9 O Vasu, O thou Hero, raise us up to ample opulence.
9 Lord of Bay Steeds, thou broughtest from the ant-hill the unwedded damsel's son whom ants were
9 Aha! this spacious earth will I deposit either here or there
2 Ye, Gods, are providence and ye are power: remove ye utterly all those who hate us.
Hitherward let your vigorous horses bear you: drink ye with us the well-pressed Soma juices.
4. Protect me, protect my offspring, protect our goods; let not ill-will overcome us, let not hostile schemes
3. The tame (village) animals are separate from the wild (forest animals); the water has flowed apart from thirst. I
3 By worship of the Gods may we, O Bounteous One, O Rudra, gain thy grace, Ruler of valiant men.
delights him, and he being delighted is purified for him with life. He who practises witchcraft should look
13 May I obtain much wealth in many places by love of thee and through thy grace, King Agni;
Preserving him as their own life immortal, the Gods possessed the wealth-bestowing Agni.
The Holy, and Sarasvati, shall hear us: ye Mighty, give us wealth with noble offspring.
kindled him. 'Kindled by Manu', he says, for Manu kindled him after the gods. 'Praised by the Rsis', he
3. Strike down, O white (horse), with thy forefoot and thy hind-foot! As timber floating in water, the poison of the
Let them not snare by day the neck of that Celestial Bird the Sun.
Shree Krishna begins answering Arjun’s questions here, and continues till the end of the chapter. Each fragment is naturally drawn towards its whole; just as a piece of stone is drawn by the force of gravitation towards the earth. The individual soul is a fragment of God, who is infinite bliss. Hence, the soul is a fragment of the ocean of infinite bliss, and it experiences the natural urge for bliss. When it strives to relish the bliss of the soul from God, it is called “Divine Love.” But when, in ignorance of its spiritual nature, it thinks of itself as the body, and seeks to relish the bliss of the body from the world, it is called “lust.”This world has been called mṛiga tṛiṣhṇā in the scriptures, meaning “like the mirage seen by the deer.” The sun rays reflecting on the hot desert sand create an illusion of water for the deer. It thinks there is water ahead of it and runs to quench its thirst. But the more it runs toward the water, the more the mirage fades away. Its dull intellect cannot recognize that it is running after an illusion. The unfortunate deer keeps chasing the illusory water and dies of exhaustion on the desert sand. Similarly, the material energy Maya too creates an illusion of happiness, and we run after that illusory happiness in the hope of quenching the thirst of our senses. But no matter how much we try, happiness keeps fading further away from us. The Garuḍ Purāṇ states:chakradharo ’pi suratvaṁ suratvalābhe sakalasurapatitvambhavtirum surapatirūrdhvagatitvaṁ tathāpi nanivartate tṛiṣhṇā (2.12.14) [v47]“A king wishes to be the emperor of the whole world; the emperor aspires to be a celestial god; a celestial god seeks to be Indra, the king of heaven; and Indra desires to be Brahma, the secondary creator. Yet the thirst for material enjoyment does not get satiated.”But when one learns to turn the mind away from material allurements and renounces the desires of the senses, such a person comes in touch with the inner bliss of the soul and becomes transcendentally situated. The Kaṭhopaniṣhad goes to the extent of saying that one who has renounced desires becomes like God:yadā sarve pramuchyante kāmā ye ’sya hṛidi śhritaḥatha martyo ’mṛito bhavatyatra brahma samaśhnute (2.3.14)[v48]“When one eliminates all selfish desires from the heart, then the materially fettered jīvātmā (soul) attains freedom from birth and death, and becomes Godlike in virtue.” Shree Krishna states in the above verse that a transcendentally situated person is one who has given up selfish desires and cravings of the senses, and is satisfied in the self.
2 Giver of horses, Indra, giver, thou, of kine, giver of barley, thou art Lord and guard of wealth:
16 O ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice what gladdens most:
14 That which ye guard and grace in battle, O ye Gods, ye Maruts, where the prize is wealth, where
Effused, they pass the cleansing fleece, while, gold-hued, they cast their covering off to pour the rain
5 Whoso, with worship serves Mitra and VaruiIa, him guard ye carefully, uninjured, from distress, guard
at home, may the herbs free thee with might, through (this) charm, (and these) stanzas, (that are) the milk of the
9 That man, moreover, merits praise who brings, auspicious Agni, sacrificial gifts
6 Agastya thus, toiling with strong endeavour, wishing for children, progeny and. power,
5 Like thirsty men they looked to heaven, in battle with the Ten Kings, surrounded and imploring.
therefore the waters appear shining by night; he takes (them) at the union of shade and light; verily for
17 Indrota, Atithigva's son, gave me six horses matched with mares
With horses brown of hue that flew with swift wings ye brought back Bhujyu from the sea of billows.
What gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceeding strong, even with these incite Indra to give us
11 Priest, let the Soma juice flow forth, for Indra longs to drink thereof.
wives of the gods [2]; verily with them he cooks it. With six (verses) he cooks; the seasons are six;
2. We pray thee bathed in butter, O bright-rayed! who lookest on the sun, Bring the Gods hither to the
'Her too I have invoked', he said, who supports people in distress and succours them as they improve.'
5 He moves, a vigorous Steed, adorned with beauteous rays of shining gold,
2 In aspect he is like the Sun; he runneth forward to the lakes,
1. GOD-SERVING men, O Sovran of the Forest, with heavenly meath at sacrifice anoint thee.
Grant us great riches, fair in form, of all good things, wealth which light labour may attain.
To streams that flow with biting waves to deserts; and heaven is stablished like a firm-set pillar.
14 O full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh moisture, freshening Herb,
The Vritra-slayer, vanquisher of fighting hosts, pre-eminent, is praised in song.
1. THE sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the Bird adorned with all an Asura's magic might.
Soma comes onward like a youth with youthful maids, and gains the beaker by a course of hundred
With mightier power, Bold God, extend thy firmness: let not malignant Yatudhanas harm thee.
His axe, wrought of good metal, he is sharpening now, wherewith the radiant Brahmanaspati will cut.
approval to him, Raka gives, Sinivali produces, and by Kuhu he establishes offspring when produced.
feet, (it is) for support; there are five layers, man is five fold; verily he preserves himself. There are five
5 Be splendid, guard us Kinsman of Vadhryasva: let not the enmity of men o'ercome thee,
2 The waters listen as they flow along: they know the origin of heaven and earth.
of life; he is (full) through the plants; the sacrifice is full of life; it is (full) through the sacrificial fees;
To describe Arjun’s feelings, Sanjay uses the word kṛipayā, meaning pity or compassion. This compassion is of two kinds. One is the divine compassion that God and the saints feel toward the souls in the material realm, on seeing their suffering in separation to God. The other is the material compassion that we feel upon seeing the bodily distress of others. Material compassion is a noble sentiment that is not perfectly directed. It is like being obsessed with the health of the car while the driver sitting within is famished for food. Arjun is experiencing this second kind of sentiment. He is overwhelmed with material pity toward his enemies gathered for battle. The fact that Arjun is overcome by grief and despair shows that he is himself in dire need of compassion. Therefore, the idea of his being merciful upon others is meaningless.In this verse, Shree Krishna is addressed as “Madhusudan.” He had slayed the demon Madhu, and hence gotten the name Madhusudan, or “slayer of the Madhu demon.” Here, He is about to slay the demon of doubt that has arisen in Arjun’s mind and is preventing him from discharging his duty.
3. When we are seeking spoil we call Agni to help us in the strife,
Brahman; between the gods and the sacrifice he creeps along; from no quarter is be injured; he who
1. THEY for the Bold and Lovely One ply manly vigour like a bow:
sole eighth day, he wins it thereby; this is the wish cow of Prajapati; verily by it the sacrificer in yonder
Heat him as milk is heated with pure Sdma hymns, great joy to him who loves the song!
Antaryama the fifteenfold (Stoma); from the fifteenfold the Brhat; from the Brhat Bharadvaja, the Rsi;
1. When, O Brihaspati, thou didst liberate (us) from existence in yonder world of Yama, (and) from hostile
Drops born as Law prescribes, that find the light of heaven!
6 The Two auspicious Ones, like women, tend him: like lowing cows they seek him in their manner.
7 Thou, Soma, boldest wealth in kine which thou hast seized from niggard churls:
2. He that drinks thee lives; (that) person thou dost preserve. For thou art the supporter of all successive
W Our friend, do thou, O god Soma, go to the dear place of the All-gods with the Jagati metre.
4 To him the peerless, who is calling you to give you aid, forth flow the drops of pleasant meath.
offers the two portions of butter; verily he does not obstruct the two eyes of the sacrifice. He sacrifices
eleven potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a dwarf beast of burden. (He offers) to Agni and Soma [1] on
Great, Indra, is thy hero might, and strength is seated in thine arms, lauding thine own imperial sway.
He who hath been effused, most rich in meath, for Gods.
1. To Agni we speak and to the trees, to the plants and to the herbs; to Indra, Brihaspati, and Sûya: they shall
the speckled ghee, he thrice asks, 'Is the oblation cooked, Çamitr?' for the gods found truth in three
The lot of childlessness remove ye from us, and let our course be rich in kine and offspring.
1. THESE songs of mine go forth as lauds of Agni, the disposing Sage,
12 They deck the Gold-hued Infant, newlyborn, even Soma, Indu, in the sieve for Gods.
And pressed the Soma, call you, Varuina, like men, with sacrificial fires aflame.
2 To him sang forth the flowing streams of Holy Law, encompassed in the home and birth-place of the
6 Agni knows all that springs from Gods, he knows the mystery of men.
many colours. (Therefore), when a cow doth beget twins portentously, growling and cross she injureth the cattle.
5. 'Tvashtar is preparing a wedding for his daughter,' thus (saying) does this whole world pass through. I free thee
Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened: eat, Indra, drink of that which stirs to meet thee.
b The waters have joined with the waters, the plants with sap.
4. O Indra, give us for our weal a triple refuge, triply strong!
p Homage to him of the wind, and to him of the storm.
1. I TRIM like grass my song for the Nasatyas and send their lauds forth as the wind drives rain-clouds,
1. Served with oblation, kindled, bright, through love of song, may Agni, bent
One with his might and thunderbolt slays Vrtra; the other as a Sage stands near in troubles.
a The Raksas is burnt up, the evil spirits are burnt up.
4 O undivided Heaven and Earth, preserve us, us, Lofty Ones! your nobIy-born descendants.
3 Drive Raksasas and foes away, break thou in pieces Vrtra'sjaws:
For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. Well be it with our quadrupeds and bipeds.
3 Varuna lets the big cask, opening downward, flow through the heaven and earth and air's mid-region.
22 Rich in their gifts for thee are herbs and waters, and earth brings all her wealth for thee, O Indra.
2 Quelling the riteless Dasyu, may we think upon the bridge of bliss,
with a smaller metre on either side, verily thus he appropriates the world of his foe. They make six
1. LET us recite the praise of Dadhikravan: may all the Mornings move me to exertion;
were. He depresses it; verily he brings down rain for him. He should not put forward the points too
2 Wise Agni Jatavedas, I beget a song of praise for thee.
1. Surya, thou mountest up to meet the hero famous for his wealth,
5 They purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve.
3 Through these our praises come thou to meet us, bright as the sunlight,
In genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that the Brahman easily found the cattle.
So let the Vasus grant us strength and vigour. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
2 Yea, he hath been acknowledged as most mighty, the joyous Priest of men, the youthful Agni.
He should cut one that is supported for one who desires support; this among trees is supported which
11 O Gods, bestow upon us riches, splendid with strength and heroes, bringing food in plenty.
Who is the man ye strive to reach? Who of your suppliants is with you?
There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Steers increased thee in the water's bosom.
power, and all alike for one who desires support; the three in the middle alike for one who desires cattle;
As 'twere from far away is heard the psalm where hymns resound in joy. He, with the triple Dames red-hued, hath
Favoured Dhvasanti and lent Purusanti help,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
14 Our chariot, Indra, boldly moves endued with splendour, ne'er repulsed,
Raise us to gain of mighty wealth, O Maghavan, O Indra, to sublime renown.
Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture as with a stone, O Indra, crush the demon.
7 O Indra-Varuna, on you for wealth in many a form I call:
Close-knit to his Bay Steeds, bolt-armed, beside the juice is he: his chariot is of gold.
cup first. The Manthin vessel is a vessel of misfortune; verily he causes death to seize on him; swiftly
bodies of the great sacrifice; verily he has recourse to Indra, of the Arka and the Açvamedha, with his
(a man) has been overcome by the army of Trishamdhi! Red portents shall be (visible)!
the deity; the Asadhas the Naksatra, the waters the deity; the Asadhas the Naksatra, the All-gods the
Even from faraway come thou unto our feast, or listen if' already here!
15 All is prepared for your delight. We are their servants evermore,
11 Come with your mighty succours, O ye Mighty; come, Indra-Varuna, to us in battle.
who knowing thus perform the twenty-four night rite, entering the year, reach a better station. There are
2. May the drops gladden thee, Lord Indra, and obtain bounty for him who pours the juice!
1. LIKE the Angirases, sing this new song forth to him, for, as in ancient days, his mighty powers are
For these specific Mantras (below), we have replaced the century-old British translations from sacredtexts with our newer translations (based on comparing the Angirasa Muni ideas versus the British
When the three-pointed one descends with onslaught he opens wide the doors that cause man trouble.
1. MOUNTED upon thy chariot-seat approach us: thine is the Sorna-draught from days aforetime.
He who beholdetb all existing creatures observetb well the zeal that is in mortals.
Vaiçvanara, the season cups [1], the Atigrahyas, the (cup) for Indra and Agni, the (cup) for the All-gods,
reply, for so the All-gods won that as their share.' Or rather he should reply, 'Indra, for it was in healing
3. Their very own amulet which the gods deposited secretly in the tree, that the gods shall give us to wear,
were to anoint with (a stalk) having no tuft, he would be as it were a thunder bolt. He anoints with one
8 Yea, Indra, all the Deities installed thee their one strong Champion in the van for battle.
8 Meet to be lauded and invoked, true Hero with his deeds of might,
7 And that strong Steed, victorious and faithful, obedient with his body in the combat,
Agni, with their thoughts', he says; with the purpose for which he raises him, he verily unites him. He
Strong Mothers of the sacrifice, seat them together on the grass.
Mahendra has the sacrificer as its deity, the Çukra is brilliance; in that he draws (the cup) for Mahendra
Distributes, skilled in sacrifice, his precious things, Invoking Priest, Immortal God.
9 For we, like Vyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, call on you:
The willing Bulls, untouched by old, rejoice them: as Gods themselves the ways of Gods they follow.
Like the milch-cows that go well-guarded to the mead, like water-brooks that reach the lake.
5 Bring gifts to Mitra and to Varuna who, Lords of all, in spirit never fail the worshipper,
May we win Mitra with our songs, and Indra, and. wait upon our Lord with adoration.
8 O God! We may have committed the sin of blaming others in error just like gamblers do when they
2. As a well-sharpened arrow swiftly to a distance flies, thus do thou, O cough, fly forth along the expanse of the
on all sides in (a place) not encircled; verily he becomes without cattle [3]. If he desire of a man, 'May
The gods and the Asuras were in conflict. Indra had recourse to Prajapati, to him he gave these victories
9 Indra, thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses, cars, and kine.
Here for your drauglit of meath are Soma juices: at this our sacrifice rejoice, ye Mighty.
(woman) hither this water! May this sacrifice win advancement for you, win prAection, win offspring for you; may it
May we find refuge in the Marut's bosom. Protect us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
1. The living drops of Soma juice pour, as they flow the gladdening drink,
5 Since they who honour me have praised my greatness,-he gave, as 'twere, his hue to those who love
verily he appropriates the strength of him whom he meets [4]. 'The fire should be brought together after
makes a portion of the intestines, for breath is in the middle; he makes a portion of the upper part [4], for
12 This Soma juice, O glowing God, flows like pure oil, effused for thee:
There shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock, and he who hath been yoked seek one to loose him.
find support in his own Stoma. He should surround it with a Jagati; cattle are connected with the Jagati,
7 Wherewith ye gave gucanti wealth and happy home, and made the fiery pit friendly for Atri's sake;
3 Nobles, with song I call that car of yours that shines with lengthened life,
Where now is Surya, where is one to tell us to what celestial sphere his ray hath wandered?
Varuna give thee what is more than ample, and in thy victory may Gods be joyful!
None slays, from near at hand or from a distance, him who is under the Adityas' guidance.
4 Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating Surya, Dawn, and Agni.
8 Hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards: these, Thunderer, now we crave of thee.
'to Indra thee!', (with these words) the stirring-vessel; 'to the All-gods thee!', (with these words) the
He pounds; verily he makes food; he puts (it) down with (a verse) addressed to Visnu; the sacrifice is
Bring opulence and drive away affliction. May brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
3 Like pools of water deep and full, like kine thou cherishest thy might;
7 The Tree whose praises never fail yields heavenly milk among our hymns,
The swift steed, bounteous, giving hundreds, thousands, hath reached the sacred grass which never
sun set, on one who has not taken (the waters), his sacrifice would not be begun [1], and he would split
went to the wives, they would not give him up; therefore [4] men do not give up even one worthy of
e Hail to the waters [1]! Hail to the plants! Hail to earth! Hail to night and day!
4 The days went round you and came back O yearners, back, to this prayer and to this solemn worship.
As a mother her child, shall bear (the arrow) in their lap;
1 DAWN on us with prosperity, O Usas, Daughter of the Sky,
c Ye are givers of the kingdom; give ye the kingdom, hail! Ye are givers of the kingdom; give N. N. the
and by (the offering) to Indra he bestows power on himself, he is freed from the evil, he prospers. He
Who slayeth Vrtra and acquireth booty, giver of blessings, Maghavan the bounteous:
support in his own Stoma. Let him surround it with a Tristubh; the Tristubh is power, the Rajanya
Gandharvas and the Apsaras have partaken of, with that make me fragrant: not any one shall hate us!
serves) for continuity. He chooses, beginning at the further end, in order of descent; therefore the Pitrs
2. Fiend-queller, friend of all men, he hath reached his shrine, his dwelling-place.
And hast awakened men to offer worship, thou hast performed, for Gods, a noble service.
1. Thou, Indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which were poured for help,
2. Listen young person! You have the dynamism needed for personal growth. You have the ability to fight
Whom, for assistance, like the five terrestrial priests. Trita hath brought to aid us hither on his car.
The sagacious Sanjay, in his narration to Dhritarasthra, uses very apt names for the personalities he refers to. Here, Arjun is called Guḍākeśh, or “conqueror of sleep.” The power of sleep is such that sooner or later, all living beings succumb to it. But with his determination, Arjun had disciplined himself in such a way that sleep would come to him only when he permitted it, and only for the amount of time he chose. By using the name Guḍākeśh for Arjun, Sanjay is subtly hinting to Dhritarasthra, “Just as this “hero amongst men” conquered sleep, so too will he conquer his despondency.”And the word he uses for Shree Krishna is Hṛiṣhīkeśh, or “master of the mind and senses.” The subtle hint here is that he who is the master of his senses will definitely ensure that the events are properly managed.
3. O Dawn who hast a store of wealth, yoke red steeds to thy car to-day.
7 Making the plants his nourishment, Agni devours and wearies not,
The pious called Sarasvati aforetime. Sarasvati send bliss to him who giveth.
hold on it, the sacrificer would be likely to die. ' The breath of the sacrifice is apart from the victim', he
2. So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the vast immortal dwelling-place!
verily with the Jagati he wins cattle for him. Eight each he puts down in the other altars; cattle have
13 Go never to the feast of one who harms us, the treacherous neighbour or. unworthy kinsman.
2 Child of a double birth he grasps at triple food; in the year's course what he hath swallowed grows
accepting a thousand. She should be spotted on either side. They say, 'Let her be spotted on one side
he says; verily on either side he supports offspring when born with the sky and the earth. 'Go to the
not in me', he said. 'Make it ready for him' [3], he replied. They made it ready for him; they made power
2.2.5.11 Mantra 11: Rules for the conduct of the Hotr, 5. 11. 1-3
a Homage to him of the drum, and to him of the drumstick.
3 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne'er are injured, may Pusan bear thee hence, for he hath
To him who goes as messenger with knowledge between all songs of men and Gods in heaven.
10. Soma, flow on with pleasant stream, strong and devoted to the Gods, our friend, unto the woollen
Great light to mortal worshipper, what time they bring the sacred gift.
3 Thou hast disclosed the kine's stall for the Angirases, and made a way for Atri by a hundred doors.
when about to be born; verily also with the smaller he approaches the greater. He takes the four teats
Rejoice you with the Maruts and with Indra, with the Kings, Gods! that ye may give us riches.
2.3.2.4 Mantra 4: The Mantras for the Creeping to the Sadas
Pañcadaça Stoma. After it the god Indra was created, the Tristubh metre, the Brhat [4] Saman, of men
4 Bright hath he beamed, the wise, the far-refulgent. Worship the two widespreading Worlds, O Agni,
7 Crop goodly pasturage and be prolific drink pure sweet water at good drinking places.
(full of life) through the ambrosia; the Pitrs are full of life; they are full of life through the Svadha-call
He who with fame extends through all existence hears words which I, his faithful servant, utter.
10. We speak to the heavens, and the stars, to earth, the Yakshas, and the mountains; to the seas.. the rivers,
thereby he bestowed upon him power and Soma drinking; he who vomits Soma is deprived of power, of
3 Thou didst perform thy first great deed of hero might what time thou showedst power, through prayer,
9 The many seek the great Steed as a stallion: the reins obey the Lord of varied colour.
We are responsible for our own elevation or debasement. Nobody can traverse the path of God-realization for us. Saints and Gurus show us the way, but we have to travel it ourselves. There is a saying in Hindi: ek peḍa do pakṣhī baiṭhe, ek guru ek chelā, apanī karanī guru utare, apanī karanī chelā[v.01] “There are two birds sitting on a tree—one Guru and one disciple. The Guru will descend by his own works, and the disciple will also only be able to climb down by his own karmas.” We have had innumerable lifetimes before this one, and God-realized Saints were always present on Earth. At any period of time, if the world is devoid of such Saints, then the souls of that period cannot become God-realized. How then can they fulfill the purpose of human life, which is God-realization? Thus, God ensures that God-realized Saints are always present in every era, to guide the sincere seekers and inspire humanity. So, in infinite past lifetimes, many times we must have met God-realized Saints and yet we did not become God-realized. This means that the problem was not lack of proper guidance, but either our reticence in accepting it or working according to it. Thus, we must first accept responsibility for our present level of spirituality, or lack thereof. Only then will we gain the confidence that if we have brought ourselves to our present state, we can also elevate ourselves by our efforts. When we suffer reversals on the path of spiritual growth, we tend to complain that others have caused havoc to us, and they are our enemies. However, our biggest enemy is our own mind. It is the saboteur that thwarts our aspirations for perfection. Shree Krishna states that, on the one hand, as the greatest benefactor of the soul, the mind has the potential of giving us the most benefit; on the other hand, as our greatest adversary, it also has the potential for causing the maximum harm. A controlled mind can accomplish many beneficial endeavors, whereas an uncontrolled mind can degrade the consciousness with most ignoble thoughts. In order to be able to use it as a friend, it is important to understand the mind’s nature. Our mind operates at four levels: Mind: When it creates thoughts, we call it mana, or the mind. Intellect: When it analyses and decides, we call it buddhi, or intellect. Chitta: When it gets attached to an object or person, we call it chitta. Ego: When it identifies with the bodily identifications and becomes proud of things like wealth, status, beauty, and learning, we call it ahankār, or ego. These are not four separate entities. They are simply four levels of functioning of the one mind. Hence, we may refer to them all together as the mind, or as the mind-intellect, or as the mind-intellect-ego, or as the mind-intellect-chitta-ego. They all refer to the same thing. The use of the word ego here is different from its connotation in Freudian psychology. Sigmund Freud (1856 – 1939), an Austrian neurologist, proposed the first theory of psychology regarding how the mind works. According to him, the ego is the “real self” that bridges the gap between our untamed desires (Id) and the value system that is learnt during childhood (Superego). Various scriptures describe the mind in one of these four ways for the purpose of explaining the concepts presented there. They are all referring to the same internal apparatus within us, which is together called antaḥ karaṇ, or the mind. For example: The Pañchadaśhī refers to all four together as the mind, and states that it is the cause of material bondage. In the Bhagavad Gita, Shree Krishna repeatedly talks of the mind and the intellect as being two things, and emphasizes the need to surrender both to God. The Yog Darśhan, while analyzing the different elements of nature, talks of three entities: mind, intellect, and ego. Shankaracharya, while explaining the apparatus available to the soul, classifies the mind into four—mind, intellect, chitta and ego. So when Shree Krishna says that we must use the mind to elevate the self, he means we must use the higher mind to elevate the lower mind. In other words, we must use the intellect to control the mind. How this can be done has been explained in detail in verses 2.41 to 2.44 and again in verse 3.43.
3 He whose great work of manly might is heaven and earth, and Varuna and Surya keep his holy law;
c Thou art the back of the waters, the birthplace of Agni,
He whom the Gods have made a gladdening draught to drink, the drop most sweet to taste, wealbringing, red of hue.
a O Agni and Visnu, may these songs gladden you in unison; come ye with radiance and strength.
Thus, knowing both the generations, he obtains the rights and dues of Gods from yonder and from
Thou flowest, Soma Pavamana, balmed with milk unto the special place of Gods.
8 He is an Ocean far-removed, yet through the heaven to him ascends the worship which these realms
3 Not by both worlds is thine own power to be surpassed, nor may thy car be stayed by mountains or
2.6.9.20 Mantra 20: The Mantras for the Offering to the Trees
sacrifices and gifts to the priests, aid us-do I seize this one with fateful fervour.
become naked. He scratches himself with the horn of the black antelope and smiles, holding it for the
where there is no Chandoma; in that there are Chandomas, there is the Sattra. The gods they win by the
Viraj metre; the two-and-a-half year-old in strength, the Gayatri metre; the three-year-old in strength, the
missiles from thee; may the threefold Stoma support thee on earth, may the Ajya hymn establish thee in
3 Great Conqueror, warnor-girt, Lord of all heroes, flow on thy way as he who winneth riches;
3 This day may all your water-bringers, Maruts, they who impel the falling rain, approach us.
Here he wins wholesome food to feed this body: as for mine old age, Nirrti consume it
For wealth, for Law. May we rejoice, Most Wise One! at the feast, with kine, rejoice, with heroes, at the
7. Both Âligî and Viligî, both father and mother, we know your kin everywhere. Deprived of your strength what will
14 And, irresistible, be thou a mighty iron fort to us,
3. Specially, Soma, Sage, by day, coming together for our weal,
15 Will ye then, O ye Maruts, grant us riches, durable, rich in men, defying onslaught.
deity; verily he approaches it with its own deity. 'I have passed by others, I have not approached others',
9 A sharpened weapon is the host of Maruts. Who, Indra, dares withstand thy bolt of thunder?
7 O Indra, lover of the song, may these quick Somas enter thee:
Agni gives precious gear for wealth, treasure he gives when he is pleased. Bring food to those who sing
f He who creeps forward knowing the gods who cause ruin at the Sadas is not ruined at the Sadas.
d Thou art the dust of Agni, the leader of the gods;
5 O Dawn who standest on the mountain ridges, Angirases now praise thy stalls of cattle.
protected by Indra, attending to the hosts, do thou that crusheth the hearts of the enemies, quickly go!
He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with springs, when juices poured have gladdened him.
low in rank he should offer to Indra on eleven potsherds this (offering) of the after-shoots of rice; verily
5 Whose flames, when thou art sending forth the smoke, completely reach the mark,
This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none, Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time.
3 He, shining in his splendour, stands high over all things that existSoma, a God as Surya is.
2 Since thou delighting in the woods hast gone unto thy mother streams,
Like an oblation on the grass, to please him, I bring this to Vaisvanara, hymn-inspirer.
2 Victorious Agni, bring to us the wealth that vanquisheth in war;
10 O King, whoever, be he friend or kinsman, hath threatened me affrighted in my slumberIf any wolf or robber fain would harm us, therefrom, O Varuna, give thou us protection.
Prolific Parents, they have made the world of life, and for their brood all round wide immortality.
enemies through rage; supporter of the body through kindliness; wealth through food; through the earth
7 Thou, Agni, knower of men's works, hast sent us good food in constant course for our subsistence:
has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. 'For him who rusheth on I seize
3 O Jatavedas, great in act, hearken thou to Praskanva's call,
10 He then who shone together with his Parents remembered Prsni's fair and secret treasure,
11 Now, Indra! lauded, glorified with praises, let power swell high, like rivers, for the singer.
7 Unto the swift One bring the swift, man-cheering, grace of sacrifice,
2 The holy sage, renowned afar, directeth his hymns to you, O Varuna and Mitra,He whose devotions, sapient Gods, ye favour so that ye fill, as 'twere, with power his autumns.
That Sakra may be joyful in our friendship and the juice we pour.
The peepal tree (sacred fig tree) has a very soothing effect on people who sit under it. Since it expands by sending down aerial roots, it is huge and provides cooling shade in a large area. The Buddha meditated and attained enlightenment under a peepal tree (sacred fig tree).The celestial sage Narad is the Guru of many great personalities such as Ved Vyas, Valmiki, Dhruv, and Prahlad. He is always engaged in singing the glories of God and doing divine works throughout the three worlds. He is also famous for deliberately creating quarrels and problems, and people sometimes misunderstand him to be a mischief-maker. However, it is his desire to purify famous personalities that makes him create quarrels around them, which ultimately result in self-introspection and purification.The Gandharva planet is inhabited by beings who sing beautifully, and amongst them the best singer is Chitrarath. The siddhas are yogis who have spiritual perfection. Amongst these, Sage Kapil revealed the Sānkhya system of philosophy and also taught the glories of bhakti yog (described in detail in the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam, third canto). He was an Avatār of God and thus Shree Krishna makes special mention of him as a manifestation of his glory.
4 Indra, come hitherward with two Bay Coursers, come thou with four, with six when invocated.
both he who knows and he who knows not. 'A horse well loaded carries well'; the horse is Agni; verily
to obtain Prajapati. There are Atiratras on either side, for securing food.
Still here thy conquering might, Maghavan, would be famed: it hath waxed vast as heaven in majesty
the joinings the months, the limbs the seasons, the trunk the year, the hair the rays (of the gun), the form
With coursers yoked by Law drive hither, Asvins, your car whose reins are light, laden with treasure.
preserves man in his full extent. Again the Viraj has ten elements, the Viraj is food; verily he finds
4. Around the water united, sit ye down, O children; around this living (father) and the waters that refresh the
the middle he meted out the Saptadaça Stoma. After it the All-gods as deities were created, the Jagati
'Thou art connected with the Maruts, thou art the force of the Maruts', (with these words) he puts on a
16. This tongue (of mine), bound (in the mouth, yet) mobile, speaks within: with it I have charmed away disease,
8. We as thy friends have chosen thee, mortals a God, to be our help.
3 I call at dawn on Aditi the Goddess, I call at noon and when the Sun is setting.
13 I will console him when his tears are falling: he shall not weep and cry for care that blesses.
thou firm and motionless', he says, for support. 'Let all the folk desire thee', he says; verily with the folk
12 May we be victors in the singer's battlesong, and meet the wicked, Much invoked!
Visnu Çipivista places the redundant in the redundant. Verily having obtained the redundant by the
4.1.3 Sukta 3 – Charm against Constipation and Retention of Urine
1. Indra and Agni, moved by songs, come to the juice, the precious dew:
is its success. He breathes over gold; gold is immortality, breath is life; verily with life he quickens
(verily it serves) to beat away the foe. 'Along the stream of ghee, with offspring, with increase of
11 Guards of the camp whose praisers are the Maruts, may we through Indra, get ourselves the booty.
1. For, verily, Pavamana, thou, divine! endued with brightest splendour, calling all
My worshipper should feel no hunger or distress, nor, Agni, should he live in sin.
second; with two (verses) he makes it come, for support; (with two) of the same form, therefore cattle
n Come forward, irresistible, along the stream of ghee, with offspring, with increase of wealth.
Then is prepared the effectual oblation, which spread in front, with tongues, erect, he drinketh,
The foe, O heroes, with the strong one who holdeth the arrow in his hands.
a Purpose, Agni, impulse, hail! Mind, intellect, Agni, impulse, hail! Thought, knowledge, Agni, impulse,
to Indra he bestowed power on himself. He who is seized by evil should offer (a beast) with a black neck
d He as a son knoweth the father, he the mother,
2. This vaunting (sorcerer) has come hither: receive him with alacrity! O Brihaspati, put him into subjection; O Agni
32 The Kanvas sing forth Agni's praise together with our Maruts' who
1. To the bull that slays the enemy, to Kâma, do I render tribute with ghee, oblation, and (sacrificial) melted butter.
offer (a beast) with a spot on its forehead and horns bent forward to Indra, the angry, the wise [1]. By
2. Approach, O beauteous hero, this auspicious pair that draws the car!
5 He by the daughters of the priest, like a fair youth, hath been adorned,
9 O Satakratu, powers which thou mid the Five Races hast displayedThese, Indra, do I claim of thee.
1. Heroes of one accord brought forth and formed for kingship Indra who wins the victory in all
him who approveth himself homage. To the strength of the Hotras hail! Vat! To him who approveth
with Indra.' At the full moon there is the subsequent offering of the enemy-dispelling (oblation), and by
1. ALLIED with thee, in this thy friendship, Soma, Indra for man made waters flow together,
Make both worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the clouds: mete out exhaustless powers for us, as
3. The Lord has made her for you and has created you for her. May He grant long life to you both.
k Thou art the right arm of Indra, the fence of the sacrificer, praised and to be praised.
2 Yama first found for us a place to dwell in: this pasture never can be taken from
impregnates seed. 'Thou givest good protection, and art well established', he says, for he draws Soma in
Fill thyself full, O Maghavan, for gain of kine, full, Indra, for the gain of steeds!
The gods are destroyers of the sacrifice, stealers of the sacrifice [2]; they sit these worlds taking and
h To the middle of speech hath the busy one arisen,
5 He, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength, rejoices in his place between the earth and
Pavamanas, and is not cut off from the Pavamanas. He who knows the continuity of the Pavamana lives
7 Surya the Sage, as if unwedded, with a Spouse, in battle-loving spirit moveth o'er the foes.
9 Secure in thy protecting care, O Pusan, never may we fail.
2 Lord of the clan, who brings us bliss, Strong, Warrior, Slayer of the fiend,
Shall not Puruvasu the singer give thee praise, O ever-prospering Maghavan, mounted on thy car?
4.5.7 Sukta 7 – Prayer to appease Arati, the Demon of grudge and avarice
Ye drew unto yourselves the spirit of Dadhyac, and then the horse's head uttered his words to you.
6 O Bearer of Oblations, thus mortals received thee from the Gods,
Delighting in juice, eagerly drinking, the Lofty One hath waxed for splendid riches.
6 O Soma, these Seven Rivers flow, as being thine, to give command:
May she who gives good gifts, the gracious Goddes. s, come speeding nigh to us for our well-being.
8 As one victorious unsubdued in battle pour forth wealth to us;
Thou smotest down the swarthy fifty thousand, and rentest forts as age consumes a garment.
May he come hither with his yoked Bay Horses; may Indra gladden him at the noon libation.
10 And thee too, O Great Aditi, thee also, Goddess, I address,
6 Sit on our sacred grass, be graciously inclined to give the wealth for which we long,
12 Thou, thunder-armed, o'erwhelmedst in the waters famed ancient Kavasa and then the Druhyu.
6 When ye, O Gods, in yonder deep closeclasping one another stood,
2 O Agni, thou, the best and earliest Angiras, fulfillest as a Sage the holy law of Gods.
5 Come to us with one mind to-day, come to us all with one accord,
7 In every need, in every fray we call as friends to succour us
Bring thou to us heroic strength: thou hast a man's regard for us.
call. The Puronuvakya has three feet; these worlds are three; verily he finds support in these worlds. The
2 O Asuras, O Varuna and Mitra, this hymn to you, like food, anew I offer.
For him who cares for me, gives gifts, supports me, who comes with kine to me who pour libations.
2 Whose prayers have they, the Youthful Ones, accepted? Who to his sacrifice hath turned the Maruts?
upon it, and from its plume. From its barbed horn, and its neck, I have charmed away the poison.
Drink of this fair, this well-effused libation: Maghavan, give us wealth when we implore thee.
O thou of broad radiance, with thy might, strength worthy of laud,
1. Still, Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and companionless art thou:
e Do thou mount the zenith; let the Pañkti of metres help thee, the Trinava, and Trayastrinça Stomas, the
2. Sage: who know the lore of speech deck thee, the strong sustainer, well:
with the light', he says; verily he bestows light upon him. He places him with four (verses); the metres
From Indra crave for us, Indu, when thou art quaffed, the blessing that gives children, wealth that
The theologians say, 'Thou hast sprinkled the offerings with water; but the waters with what?' 'With the
Slay those who meet thee, those who flee, who follow: make all thy promise true; be all completed.
4 Among all fires these fires have shone most brightly, splendid with light, begirt by noble heroes,
1. Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of the kine,
Agrayana, is speech, the eighth day is speech, and therefore on the eighth day the Agrayana is drawn;
7. Varuna, Mitra, sapient pair, pour fatness on our pastures, pour
Flow, Indu, send these Winds thy lower kinsmen, setting them free like locks of hair unbraided.
debate of those that debate against us, render them devoid of force, O plant!
Sodaçin; verily he does not leave the Anustubh. Then they say, 'If the days fall in the same half month,
Sweets from your sweet shall drop, lovers of sweetness! These have they dressed for you as dainty
8 Unwelcome for adoption is the stranger, one to be thought of as another's offipring,
1. GRACIOUSLY further, O ye Heaven and Earth, this speech striving to win reward, of me your
2. Of which the world shall know forthwith as given by thee abundantly:
A hundred, thousandfold, ever increasing? May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
28 Fill thyself full of juice, flow forth, O Soma, thou with all thy stalks,
the bolt kindles him to prosperity, or it burns him; the twenty-onefold is the Stotra used, for support;
Speed him with help in his irypired invokings: down sink the sorcerer, the prayerless Dasyu.
25 Soma, as leader of the song flow onward with thy wondrous aids,
(Stoma) with Dvipada verses, for support. The wives (of the sacrificers) sing, for offspring, for
Indra, may hymns accordant with thee daily strengthen thee, Bold One, for the draught of Soma.
those among the gods who are not exhausted. It has a follower to avoid monotony. He follows it with an
n Be thou (good) for every sacrifice, for the gods, for every prayer.
O Vayu, drink thou of our meath: come unto our drink-offerings.
Whom Indra dearly loves, the waves and ten companions dip and bathe
1. Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni: let not his body or his skin be scattered.
down Vrtra,Who through the might of Indra's operation came forth as Gods in course of Law and Order.
Whence springs the hero, powerful, skilled in action, lover of Gods, adjuster of the press-stones.
(rite). If they employ the Brhat and the Rathantara Samans, it would be as if they were to provide a boat
4. Far off or present even now, send forth thy shouting first of all!
1. DEAR is this offering in your mouth, O Indra and Brhaspati:
When wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds?
He who when rubbed with force is brought to life by men upon the lofty height of earth;
e He who having piled the fire steps on it is liable to go to ruin. 'To thee I come praising with holy
two-night rite, they grasped it, and sacrificed with it. Then they went to the world of heaven. He, who
of the after-shoots of rice, for it is the deity of him who is low in rank; (verily it serves) for prosperity.
how should another [7] be taken out for (it)? He should deposit the extinguished embers and produce
11 May we increase the laud and gain us vigour: come to our song, ye whom one chariot carries.
In all the quarters may I become a lord of strength.
And with his mighty weapon in his dwelling smote down the footless evil-speaking ogre.
So that not one of them may ever thence return: so may your wrathful might prevail and conquer them.
4 I tarried many a year within this altar: I leave the Father, for my choice is Indra.
3 Make his cars hear, that he may show his vigour and may be joyful in the way he loveth.
2 Ye Sapient Ones who made the lightly-rolling car out of your mind, by thought, the car that never errs,
Striving for wealth, with varied plans, we follow our desires like kine. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
2. With reins they had to be measured, with outstretched arms they had to be measured out. May thy hairs grow
Not one of these is match for thee, O Indra. Thou far surpassest all these living creatures.
3 Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to obtain thine aid,
How can devotees be considered venerable, merely for having made the correct resolve? Shree Krishna explains that if they continue the process of exclusive devotion with unflinching faith in God, their hearts will become purified and they will swiftly develop saintly virtues.Divine virtues emanate from God Himself. He is perfectly just, truthful, compassionate, loving, merciful, etc. Since we souls are His tiny parts, we are all naturally drawn to these godly qualities. But the process of becoming virtuous remains an elusive mystery. From childhood, we have heard that we must speak the truth, serve others, be free from anger, etc. and yet we are unable to put those teachings into practice for the simple reason that our mind is impure. Without purification of the mind, blemishes of character cannot be eradicated fully and permanently. Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj declares the irrefutable truth regarding developing divine virtues:satya ahinsā ādi mana! bina hari bhajana na pāyajala te ghṛita nikale nahīñ, koṭina kariya upāya (Bhakti Śhatak verse 35)“Oil stains on a cloth cannot be removed by water, no matter how much we try. Similarly, truthfulness, non-violence, and other virtuous qualities cannot be acquired without engaging in devotion to God.” These qualities manifest when the mind is purified; and the purification of the mind cannot take place without attaching it to the all-pure God.Further, Shree Krishna asks Arjun to boldly declare that His devotees will never perish. He does not say, “The jñānī (person of knowledge) will not be lost.” Nor does He say, “The karmī (performer of rituals) shall not perish.” He makes His promise for His bhaktas (devotees), saying that “they shall never come to ruin.” Thereby, He reiterates what He had stated in verse 9.22, that He personally carries the burden of maintaining those who depend upon Him and engage in exclusive devotion unto Him.It may seem intriguing why Shree Krishna asks Arjun to make this statement, instead of declaring it Himself? The reason is that under special circumstances the Lord sometimes breaks His word, but He never permits His devotees’ word to be broken. For example, Shree Krishna had resolved that He would not lift weapons during the Mahabharat war. But when Bheeshma, considered the perfect devotee, resolved that he would either kill Arjun by sunset the next day or make the Lord lift weapons to protect him, Shree Krishna broke His own vow to protect the vow made by Bheeshma. Thus, to reaffirm the strength of His statement, Shree Krishna here says, “Arjun, you declare that My devotee will never perish, for I shall guarantee that your word will be kept.”
harm the sacrifice. The gods divided the Gayatri, five syllables in front and three behind. Then the
1. The brilliancy that is in the lion, the tiger, and the serpent; in Agni, the Brâhmana, and Surya (shall be ours)!
Gandharva, who purifieth thoughts purify our thought; may the lord of speech to-day make sweet our
said to be connected with the seasons. Those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of eleven nights,
3 Him who hath honoured, when the flame is kindled at break of dawn, the Courser Dadhikrivan,
May he the true, the fleet, the lover of the course, the bird-like Dadhikravan, bring food, strength, and
5 O Fathers, may the Heavenly Folk give us our spirit once again,
splendour upon him; he becomes resplendent. The sacrificial post is of Bilva wood. Whence yonder [1]
weapons of the sacrifice are the sacrifice; verily he collects the sacrifice. If he were to collect them one
Pay due regard unto our friendship and our praise. Their cars moved onward as they went to victory.
Robed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the Lord of Might whose friendship gives a dwelling.
Never transgressing the divine commandments, she is beheld visible with the sunbeams.
Indra with might longed for it as it panted: the hero-hearted laid aside his weapons.
himself with his hand [7] his offspring would be liable to the itch; if he were to smile, they would
5. Shoot forth, O Agni, with thy flame: demolish them on every side!
5 First messenger art thou, meet for election: drink thou thy fill invited to the Anirta,
The Kings who kept their promises restored the Brahman's wedded wife,
At home, abroad, from injury preserve him. May brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
Whose splendour is sublime, whose light shone brilliant in, creation, who, wise and golden-handed, in his beauty
with many. The bays of Indra, which drink the Soma, are the Rc and the Saman, the enclosing-sticks are
'O Indra and Agni, (the brick) that quaketh not', (with these words) he puts down the naturally perforated
12 Vast, with thine ample power, with eager movement, against this Vrtra cast thy bolt of thunder.
And the grass put within his mouth to bait him,-among the Gods, too, let all these be with thee.
10 He, with his Gods who love mankind, the Wondrous, giving like Varuna who works with magic,
and he girds the wife (of the sacrificer); he puts in place the anointing waters and the melted butter.
Furthers with his own holy works his offspring, and ever passes those whose flames ascend not.
3 Illustrious is the man whoever presseth out Soma for him in sunshine or in cloud and rain.
Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the chosen, well-loved Master in the beaker.
3. As the rays of the sun swiftly to a distance fly, thus do thou, O cough, fly forth along the flood of the sea!
have slain Vrtra, my power and strength [2] have gone into the earth; then the plants and roots have been
37 What thing I truly am I know not clearly: mysterious, fettered in my mind I wander.
2 In the tree-tops the air he hath extended, put milk in kine and vigorous speed in horses,
they instigate thy breath, may they instigate thy sight, may they instigate thine ear.
3 The mighty Pavamana's roar is heard as 'twere the rush of rain
11 As Germ Celestial he is called Tanunapat, and Narasamsa born diffused in varied shape.
We come with gifts of pleasant food, with juice poured forth, invoking thee,
Holy One, drinker out of season, coming thrice, in a moment, through fit prayers, from heaven.
7 Thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour: an earlier saw, a later one shall see thee.
8 Give us not up to any man who hateth us, nor let our milch-cows stray, whose udders give us food,
3. Yea, and thou art the Asvins', friend the mother of the cows art thou: O Dawn, thou rules over wealth
11 Come to the man's, the sacrificer's calling: hear, Kings of Immortality, joy-givers!
And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant, heavenly-bright invention.
1. FORT-RENDER, Lord of Wealth, dispelling foemen, Indra with lightnings hath o'ercome the Dasa.
grasp', he says [2]. The sacrifice is he who blows here; verily he clearly wins him. He clenches his fist;
Your Indra, Much-invoked, I bend with song, as bends a wright his wheel of solid wood.
1. VARUNA cut a pathway out for Surya, and led the watery floods of rivers onward.
5 When the Law's lovers mounted and ap. proached me as 1 sate lone upon the dear sky's summit.
Clans in the birth-place of the Gods, in the three luminous realms of heaven.
on the east; verily with these he supports breath. 'This one on the right, the all-worker', (with these words
7. With homage will I reverence thee, Agni, like a long-tailed steed,
1. HE slays the foe and wins the spoil who worships Indra and Agni, strong and mighty Heroes,
With cunning, Rbhus, rich in treasure, fashioned the two swift Tawny Steeds who carry Indra.
2.3.4.2 Mantra 2: The Mantras for the Offering of a Goat
The Babe Unborn supporteth this world's burthen, fuIfilleth Law and overcometh falsehood.
6 The beams of Pavamana, sent from earth and heaven, his ensigns who is ever steadfast, travel
7 When Sahadeva's princely son with two bay horses thought of me,
4. Thy bewildering quality (madam), O (plant?) that art bewildering (madivati), we cause to fall like a reed. As a
5. Before it (the amulet as a guest) ghee, surâ (liquor), honey, and every kind of food we place. The amulet having
offspring. In that after undergoing penance he speaks the speech of the consecrated, the sacrificer thus
This universe exults thereat, yea, all that is upon the earth.
25. The amulet . . . has come to me with a stream of honey and ghee together with sweet drink.
To you at sacrifice the Kanvas send the prayer: graciously listen to their call.
He, turned to us, hath grown to hero vigour: broad, wide, he hath been decked by those who serve him.
29 Rbhuksan, not to be restrained, who strengthened Tugra's son in lauds,
8 May the Dames, wives of Gods, enjoy our presents, Rat, Asvini, Agnayi, and Indrani.
5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee with their wondrous Powers and wisdom.
9. Terrible are the missiles of Indra, with a hundred points, golden; with these he shall pierce the Gandharvas,
And let the priest whose press-stones ring forth loudly, go down with his oblation to the river.
have been brought hither. The diseases of cattle and men have been driven out by the herbs: let them pass into
he makes it to be with the gods; with goats' milk he pours upon it; the milk of the goat is the highest
6 Indra, we laud thy great deeds wrought aforetime, we laud thine exploits later of achievement;
Varuna, stay thou here and be not angry; steal not our life from us, O thou Wide-Ruler.
Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
Your strong rain-cloud, ye Mighty Ones, hath swollen, honouring men as 'twere with milk's outpouring.
17 In His stride the Lord (Visnu) took three steps and the whole universe
1. WHEN Will men's guardians hasting hear with favour the song of Angiras's pious
2 Three times unto our solemn rite comes Agni like a charioteer,
4 With oil and sacred gifts I sprinkle Agni who makes his home in front of all things living,
x Of thee, O god Soma, that art purified in the waters, that art pressed by men, over whom the Yajus is
2 These men have come to Indra for assistance: shall he not quickly come upon these pathways?
Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders of the. light.
potsherds; verily he has recourse to Indra with his own share; verily he bestows power upon him. The
1. Pour on the juice the heated milk which hasteneth to heaven and. earth;
8 As Gladdener, Warrior never harmed in battle, with thousand genial streams, pour strength and
Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
1. The Almighty Lord has yoked us together in a strong bond. He is the one whose Will prevails. May He keep us
1. Associate with fires, make your God Agni envoy at sacrifice, best skilled in worship,
k Thou art the firm (quarter) and the earth of the god Savitr, the Maruts, Varuna.
Your Fathers, enemies of Gods, were smitten down, and, Indra-Agni, ye survive.
They said, 'Let us choose a boon; let us obtain offspring from after the menses; let us enjoy intercourse
what way wilt thou enjoy me?' 'I will kindle thee; I will enter thee for thine enjoyment', he answered.
6 Hear ye the song of him who hastens speedily. O Asvins, I am he who sang your praise.
3 O God, for service of the Gods flow onward, for food sublime, as Indra's drink, O Soma.
He who sacrifices knowing the 'ascent' verses of the Pavamana (Stotras) mounts on the Pavamanas and
6 Agni, together with the Gods and Manu's folk by thought extending sacrifice in varied form,
11 We count not then as sinners, nor as niggardly or foolish men,
stumbling, for the support of the great, he shall, as if upon the heaven, found his own light!
2 Agni, the Bounteous Giver, bright with varied flames, laud thou, O singer SobhariHim who controls this sacred food with Soma blent, who hath first claim to sacrifice.
of power and of Soma drinking. In that it is (offered) to Soma, he wins Soma drinking; in that it is
collected brilliance of the Prstha (Stotras); in that he puts down the 'sitters on the vault' [1], verily he
utter speech, cannot utter speech; Sarasvati is speech; verily he has recourse to Sarasvati with her own
1. WHETHER, O Asvins, ye this day be far remote or near at hand,
The Vasus were contented with his wisdom, so the Gods made him their oblationbearer.
9 Agni shines far and wide with lofty splendour, and by his greatness makes all things apparent.
5 Nine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid-most here, O Visvakarman,
Sever not thou our friendship: think thereon for us. This, with a heart that longs for bliss, we seek from
12 Him have the Gods appointed Priest of sacrifice, oblation-bearer, passing wise.
18 Be Lord of joyous songs, O Vrtra-slayer, Bull dear to all, who gives the power of living.
13 Do not play with dice. Till your land and rejoice in your income and property so obtained, feeling
2 Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of the flesh,
3 Sure in the worlds he was a skilful Craftsman, he who produced these Twain the Earth and Heaven.
Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and with your thought, O Earth and Sky,
1. To him who dealeth out all wealth, the sweet-toned Hotar-priest of men,
The great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, abider with men, is seated in the waters' eddy.
11 Well-skilled in speech we magnify thee, Soma, with our sacred songs:
the drop is seed; verily thus he impregnates seed. 'Possessing power', he says [3]; power is offspring;
3 Agni the God of all mankind, gives, verily, a steed to man.
6 Hither, O Indu, bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundredfold:
kindled Gâtavedas (fire), through (this) charm, find favour, well-being, offspring, sight, and cattle!
3 The singers' for their aid, invoke Indra and Vayu, swift as mind,
moon (sacrifices); on every day (the Soma) of those who have oblation holders is pressed. By him who
should contain the word 'strong (vrsan)'; verily he takes Indra away from their morning pressing. Or
3. When willhe trample, like a weed, the man who hath no gift for him?
None other comforter is found save only these: my longings and my hopes are fixt upon the Gods.
10 May we ourselves be lords of during riches, of ample sustenance for car and hones.
d Homage to the quiver-bearer, and to the owner of the quiver.
will up to birth, for that was what they chose as a boon. They took a third of his guilt, it became (a
Adhvaryu nor sacrificer goes to ruin. If he were to offer with the milk of domesticated animals [1], he
3 These prayers, O thou who hearest prayer are offered: seat thee on the grass.
2.1.8.9 Mantra 9: The Offerings in the Houses of the Ratnins
drink. The deities who share in the pressings of those who leave out the day go to their places; they offer
1. O MARUTS, when the sage hath poured the Trstup forth as food for you,
11. Sing, with oblation, praise to him who maketh glad, who with. Rijisvan drove the dusky brood away!
21. Heaven and earth shall shriek at them, and the atmosphere, along with the divine powers! Neither aider, nor
11 After the lore of ancient time I make, like Kanva, beauteous songs,
thus the Adabhya is drawn, prospers himself, his foe is defeated. Because the gods deceived the Asuras
6 Even as the holy wish, the gift is offered: may he, unsated, come when men desire him.
wins animals. There are all forms in these; all forms are made when Agni has to be piled up, therefore
26. Rock, stone, dust is this earth; this earth is supported, held together. To this golden-breasted earth I have
8 Here tell this forth, O Agni: whosoever is, he himself, or acteth as, a demon,
3. When he hath roused the line of his attendants, with the bright milk bright Agni is anointed.
a Thou art the eastern quarter, the favourable by name; of thee as such Agni is the overlord, the black
4 Agni, best Priest, pay worship with oblation; quickly commend the gift to be presented;
8 These have I brought to thee like kine. O Night, thou Child of Heaven, accept
1. Agni is watchful, and the Richas love him: Agni is watchful, Sama hymns approach him.
To him who praises you while these libations flow: that man, O Gods, ye ne'er consume.
because Prajapati redeemed it from Agni, therefore is it connected with Prajapati; the barren goat is
Therewith do I smite the rival who is hard to slay;
upon him. They are made in milk; verily he bestows brilliance upon him. He puts Dhatr in the middle;
6 Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men: the Steer took notice of the people's songs of
They who take cognizance of all of this are ye. Their cars moved onward as they went to victory.
Therefore 'choice' (vâr 'water') has been given you as your name!
12. As the soma at the second (mid-day) pressure is dear to Indra and Agni, thus in my own person, O Indra, and
Unwearied, armed with shafts and wondrous weapons, free, real heroes, conquerors of armies.
Indra hath set at liberty to wander on earth the streams encompassed pressed together.
7 He, strong of wing, hath lightened up the regions, deep-quivering Asura, the gentle Leader.
If, O Sudhanvan's Children, ye will do this thing ye shall participate in sacrifice with Gods.
11 O Heroes, listen to the son of Vyasva, and regard me here,
7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra, the pitiless Hero, wild with anger,
Parna overheard it; he whose ladle is made of Parna wood is styled famous; he hears no evil bruit. The
8 These thine old deeds new bards have sung, O Indra. Thou conqueredst, boundest many tribes for
expiration and inspiration deserted him; skill is expiration, intelligence is inspiration; therefore one who
1. Pour forth on us abundant wealth, O Pavamana, with thy stream.
1. Hero, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink:
8. Where is that ever-youthful Steer, strong-necked and never yet bent down?
6 Accept this eulogy of mine whose model is the Gayatri:
9 O Indra, many are thine aids, many thy ways of guiding us,
gambling, and ignorance have led me into the wrong path. Even in dreams am I not free of sin.
Pass over them; make ye the niggard's life decay: give light unto the singer eloquent in praise.
when it has been established.' He first presses eight times; the Gayatri has eight syllables, the morning
ascends to heaven. In sixty autumns the treasurer (of the porridge) shall fetch it!
porters [2], therefore the wind accompanies all the seasons. He puts down the rain-winners; verily he
7 Blest were these Dawns of old, shining with succour, true with the truth that springs from holy Order;
8 Mitra and Varuna they guard from censure: Aryaman too, discovers worthless sinners Firm things are
5 Thus, Soma, Conqueror of wealth! flow, finding furtherance for us,
Give never-failing ever-conquering riches: with Gods for our allies may we be victors.
the three days in succession mount upon the world of heaven turning away (from earth). There is a three
15 May praise from us who think Qn thee, O Indra, bring thee near to us.
Much-lauded! help us with thy power to riches: may I be sharer of thy Godlike favour.
8 After thee, Courser, come the car, the bridegroom, the kine come after, and the charm of maidens.
For expiration, for cross-breathing, for inspiration; for speech thee; for sight thee; with that deity, in the
Best Sacrificer, brightest One, refulgent remove thou far from us all those who hate us.
For Indra poured as cheering juice to make him glad, as nearest and farseeing bearer-up of heaven.
4 Carefully tending Law with Law they have attained their vigorous might.
g Enter the right thigh of Indra, glad the glad, tender the tender.
35. Thou art a lusty male, penetratest heaven: go thou to the Rishis, descended from Rishis! Dwell in the world of
10 'How great his power resistless! how invincible the Vrtra-slayer's matchless might!
10 They who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of steeds, moved by desire of great renownDo thou with saving help preserve them from distress, Most Youthful! with a hundred forts.
As a chariot with easy-going wheels, the spell shall turn back upon him that prepares the spell!
1. GREEN-HUED! as one who giveth strength flow on for Gods to drink, a draught
Vayu with his own share; verily Vayu causes these worlds and the people to give to him; these worlds
4.2.28 Sukta 28 – Prayer for Long Life pronounced over a Boy
6. And in the day our prayer is this: May Aditi come nigh to help,
13 We will rejoice to drink the tenfold present when the twicefive come bearing sacred viands.
1. WITH offerings of our own we choose thee, Agni, as Invoking Priest,
across all misfortunes to long life, to a life of a hundred autumns!
5 We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic; yea, ye were Physicians bringing health.
With the eastern quarter I place thee, with the Gayatri metre, with Agni as the deity; with the head of
For these presented viands, seeking riches, increase thy strength like streams of water flowing.
With holy offerings and invocations of the Gods, we mean, that we may win the spoil.
question Prajapati; he said [4], Prajapati, 'Thou art the messenger of mind, for what one thinks of in the
white of the black antelope skin is the colour of the day, the black of the night. Whatever is imbued in
Loud low the Milch-kine swimming in the waters: set be the stones that grace our holy service.
foot (dust) of him (who is expelling him); Aditi is this (earth); verily she confirms the kingdom for him;
l Of the seasons spring I delight; delighted may it delight me.
5 I call on Savitar the God, on Morning, Brhaspati, and Dadhikras, and Agni,
O Agni, make them turn hither to succour us. Give strength, and win it for thyself.
3. Through these our praises, come thou to meet us, bright as the sunlight,
7 They ever vigilant, with eyes that close not, caring for heaven and earth, lead on the thoughtless.
Finding his threefold refuge in the waters, goes singing, as a priest, to the assemblies.
2 Bring forth the God with song divine, being Jatavedas hitherward,
shining brilliantly, wear it, unto long life, during a hundred autumns!
1. I HAVE beheld the might of this Great Being. Immortal in the midst of tribes of mortals.
5 Arrange the buckets in their place securely fasten on the straps.
Be gracious unto us, O God, and bless us, and then vouchsafe us doubly-strong protection.
drawn at the midday pressing, they are drawn for the sacrificer as slaying the foe. Of him, when he had
Him who spread out both worlds by Law Eternal they balm with oil, strong Steed who never faileth.
this (brick), to it I resort, and may it [1] be my protection and my refuge.
offered to Indra, the Soma drink is power; verily he wins power, the Soma-drink. In that it is offered to
fellows. He sips water; verily he becomes pure within. He consecrates him with a garment; the linen
(earth) is speech, therefore they see this (earth), they see speech speaking; the second is the atmosphere,
oneself; the Rastrabhrts are the kingdom, the people are the kingdom, cattle are the kingdom, in that he
3 Burn thou up all the Riksasas, O Agni; ward thou off curses from our sacrifices.
it became this (earth); what second fell away became yonder (sky); this is the Viraj, yonder the Svaraj;
1. For Vritra-slaying Indra, thou, Soma, art poured that he may drink,
Loving the varied shows of holy Order at the first flush of dawn he shines as envoy.
in cattle. He should pile in hawk shape who desires the sky; the hawk is the best flier among birds;
13 Come, thou most potent Indra, come to drink the savoury Soma juice.
5 Priest doubly born, he through his love of glory hath in his keeping all things worth the choosing,
lovely one, the leader, the guardian of the world, that holds the trees and plants.
Fain, as a sire, to see his child prolific, he sped to meet her with an eager spirit.
Shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, casting his weapons forth and dealing bounties.
Stablished in holy oil is Agni's pasture, on the Gandharva path of Law and Order.
He who desires splendour should offer on eight potsherds to Agni and Soma; verily he has recourse to
4 Him, Blessed One, the Seven strong Floods augmented, him white at birth and red when waxen
28. Rising or sitting, standing or walking, may we not stumble with our right or left foot upon the earth!
14 Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty at the Gods' banquet, Pour the rain of
(sacrifices) who should know the normal and reversed order'. What follows on the new moon is the
2.5.6.6 Mantra 6: Explanation of Certain Points in the Ritual in v.6.5
5 When to their task they come with zeal, may they obtain the Giver's grace,
2 They spring to birth, the lofty Ones, the Bulls of Heaven, divine, the youths of Rudra, free from spot
6. Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, immortal Priest among the Gods,
With lifted hands your servant hath adored you. Yearningfor you the press-stones shed the liquid.
8 Comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens and on the earth,
Fashion for us, O Rbhus, power and splendid wealth, rich in high courage, excellent, and vital strength.
1 To Varuna and Mitra we offerwith songs, as Atri did. Sit on the sacred grass to drink the Soma juice.
4 Thou, Indu, in thy brilliancy, pourest on us, as Indra's Friend,
May we rejoice through many autumns, quelling our foes, as days subdue the nights with splendour.
2.6.6 Prapathaka 6: The Exposition of the Daksina and other Offerings
s Let the Vasus grasp thee with the Gayatri metre, let the Rudras grasp thee with the Tristubb. metre, let
7 While we abide in these fixed habitations, and from the lap of Aditi win favour,
verses, and Prajapati is the sacrifice, he satisfies the sacrifice from the beginning with them. They are of
An offering from us, this hymn is brought to you, as, unto one who th irsts for water, heavenly springs.
What time thou sentest down life with a God's own power, freeing the floods.
should mix for one who desires rain; verily he wins rain. If it should fall quickly, Parjanya would be
1. Heroes of one accord brought forth and formed for kingship
For Indra, he is Sakra, he shall aid us while he gives us wealth.
In Indra, yea in him victorious through his strength, the Gods have joyed at feast and when the Soma
5. High hymns have sounded forth the praise of Maghavan, supporter of mankind, of Indra meet for
Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the draughts of Soma have made Indra glad.
No, not by sacrifice, to Indra. praised of all, resistless, daring, bold in might.
5 This Soma here expressed with stones and dressed with milk for thy carouse,
5 Thou, Agni! multiform, God who art lauded much! givest in every house subsistence as of old.
3. If thou dost run three leagues away, (or even) five leagues, the distance coursed by a horseman, from there
1. ONE state begets another state: husk is made visible from husk:
the victim. He offers to Visnu Çipivista; Visnu Çipivista is the redundancy of the sacrifice, the greatness
That bears its part in every fray, invincible and seeking spoil.
Some people think that action refers only to professional work, and not to daily activities such as eating, drinking, sleeping, waking and thinking. So when they renounce their profession, they think they are not performing actions. But Shree Krishna considers all activities performed with the body, mind, and tongue as actions. Hence, he tells Arjun that complete inactivity is impossible even for a moment. If we simply sit down, it is an activity; if we lie down, that is also an activity; if we fall asleep, the mind is still engaged in dreaming; even in deep sleep, the heart and other bodily organs are functioning. Thus Shree Krishna declares that for human beings inactivity is an impossible state to reach, since the body-mind-intellect mechanism is compelled by its own make-up of the three guṇas (sattva, rajas, and tamas) to perform work in the world. The Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam contains a similar verse:na hi kaśhchit kṣhaṇam api jātu tiṣhṭhaty akarma-kṛitkāryate hy avaśhaḥ karma guṇaiḥ svābhāvikair balāt (6.1.53)[v1]“Nobody can remain inactive for even a moment. Everyone is forced to act by their modes of nature.”
protect himself. He lies on the right side; that is the abode of the sacrifice; verily he lies in his own
1. Homage (be) to the deliriously hot, the shaking, exciting, impetuous (takman)! Homage to the cold (takman), to
Knowing the paths by mid-air's spacious region bring hither Gods to feast on our oblation.
15 Let not the fire, smoke-scented, make thee crackle, nor glowing caldron smell and break to pieces.
b Let Viçvakarman place thee in the ridge of the atmosphere, encompassing, expanding, resplendent,
8 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o'er the joyous draught.
16 Fain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains and of water-floods:
Mitra art thou, the sender of true blessings: thou and King Varuna be both my helpers.
3 Why, Maghavan, do they call thee Bounteous; Giver? Quicken me: thou, I hear, art he who quickens.
1. Thou, Soma, hast a running stream, sweet-toned most strong at sacrifice:
7 No team of goats shall draw your car, O Maruts, no horse no charioteer be he who drives it.
Consumed.him as tongues cat what teeth have compassed: he threw the prisons of the red cows open.
1. Agni is head and height of heaven, the master of the earth is he:
Which holy singers deck, as if extending and heating that which holds the fatty membrane.
And that great beast, your chariot-steed, fair, wonderful, makes dainty food. Lovers of sweetness, hear
5. May Agni, worshipped, bring us bliss: may the gift, blessed one! and sacrifice bring bliss.
beast (is offered) in the middle, and the after-sacrifices with speckled butter. Therefore that is mixed as
verily thereby the sacrifice milks this (earth). In that he responds standing, so the Adhvaryu goes not
dawn shines away from him and he enters the darkness, the evil, to whom when the litany to the Açvins
produced separately. The omentum is the chief part of cattle, the strew the chief of plants; verily he
When the Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed with his iron claws he slays the Dasyus.
sacrifices, desirous of cattle, with (the offering) of three constituents, creates cattle from the very source
8 Befriend us thou as knowing all. Sage, duly worship thou the Gods,
n Of the seasons the rains I delight; delighted may they delight me.
c You Indra chose for the contest with Vrtra, ye chose Indra for
Ye found the Sun ye found the light of heaven: ye killed all darkness and the Gods' blasphemers.
Of Asuras had pierced with gloom. This none besides had power to do.
Indra and Agni, show yourselves among us with your supreme and unrestricted bounties.
Then Indra, with his spirit concentrated, smote him for ever with his strongest weapon.
8 O thou to whom thy Bays are dear, loose not thy Horses far from us:
p May I behold the light, the radiance for all men.
verily he places him in the middle of a village. These (offerings) also should he offer who is long ill; the
8. On the spot where the ship glided down, on the peak of the Himavant, there came to sight the ambrosia, there
Worshippers have exalted Soma with their hymns, and milch kine have come near to meet him with
2. Right here, do thou, O house, stand firmly, full of horses, full of cattle, full of abundance! Full of sap, ful.] of
the Pitrs, what is above the part dug in up to the girdle belongs to men, the girdle belongs to the plants
Jayeth the Vrtras and his foes in battles, and through your mighty favours is made famous.
These Cows, the cattle of the pious worshipper, roam over widespread pasture where no danger is.
n Araru is smitten away from the earth, he that sacrifices not to the gods.
are cattle; verily he makes cattle stay with himself. 'Be ye here; go not hence', he says; verily he makes
updated on a regular basis with the input of the Dharmasya (global Dharmic community). The essence
6 Now, Agni, come to succour us; let priests draw nigh to offer gifts;
potsherds; the Maruts are in seven troops; verily by troops he wins his fellows for him. He places (it)
5 O God! The Lord of the Universe! The stimulator of good thoughts!
2 They who with laud extol the ancient statutes, when they shine forth infallible dividers,
13 So may our new prayer bring thee to protect us, thee well-armed Hero with thy bolt of thunder,
4 E'en humble rites with his Bay steeds he visits: he wields the bolt, drinks Soma, gives us cattle.
Lauded by thee, these Maruts, Sons o Rudra, O Rsi, have sent down the heavenly treasure.
I touch the head of thee, the immortal, O Hotr, for increase of wealth, good offspring, strength.
Bahispavamana; for they go away, and they praise with verses which go away; he returns, and with a
heaven. He puts it forward (with its points) to the east; verily he makes the sacrificer go to the world of
6 Distinguished by their varied form, they sprang from Agni, from the sky.
we would reverence with oblations the crooks and hooks of thee that hast, as a seizer, seized the limbs of this
created, the Gayatri metre, the Rathantara Saman, of men the Brahman, of cattle the goat; therefore are
The red, the brown of Varuna ever mindful: may they ward off from us all grief and trouble.
Acknowledge them. among the Gods, for thou art the rmost excellent, the worshipper's blissful
a Be ye pure for the divine rite, the sacrifice to the gods.
part [8] of the post is the part above the top; that is their share; verily by it he delights them. The gods
7. Guard of all being, generating creatures, loud roared the sea as highest law commanded.
chariot is the last: it shall hit a post, and come to grief!
With those who come at dawn let Mitra, Aryaman sit on the grass at sacrifice.
5 Ye store the germ of life in female creatures, ye lay it up within all living beings.
Established in the heaven the eye of Surya, and caused Svarbhanu's magic arts to vanish.
O thou invoked by many, day by day I urge thee with my word, a charger rapid in his tread.
his eating of food' [1], he should offer separately for him; verily he separates his breaths and his eating
Fain in a moment, when the morns are breaking, to part the earth's ends and the spacious regions.
Gather therefrom, O Conqueror, and bring to us: fail not the hope of him who loves and sings to thee.
Or in the sea, thou art the guard of Soma juice.
the vishkandha (and) the samskandha, (overcoming the powerful (disease) with power!
8. While flowing, meet for sacrifice, he hath gone up to heaven, across
for support; verily they place radiance in themselves. There are many Sodaçins, and therefore there are
him free, for support. The vow if not released is liable to consume (the sacrificer); 'O Agni, lord of
1 URGE us not, Maghavan, to this distressful fight, for none may comprehend the limit of thy strength.
5 Like youthful women without brothers, straying, like dames who hate their lords, of evil conduct,
2 He hath paid sacrifices, toiled in worship, and offered gifts to wealth-increasing Agni.
h To Agni hail! To Soma hail! To Savitr hail! To Sarasvati hail!
4 Those living men extolled thy deed, O Indra, those who would fain burst through the stall of cattle,
7 Yea, great art thou whose conquering might two independent Powers confess.
offerings worn out, but the oblation fresh?' He should reply, 'Because it is Prajapati's [1], for Prajapati is
23. As splendour is in the sacrificer, as (splendour) has been deposited in the sacrifice, thus shall the amulet of
9 He brings together and he parts, the great High Priest; extolled is he, in battle Brahmapaspati.
5 Sitting like birds beside thy meath., mingled with milk, that gladdeneth and exalteth thee,
8 Soul of the sacrifice, the juice effused flows quickly on: he keeps
c The west of the quarters; the rains of the seasons; the All-gods the deity; the peasants [1] the wealth;
For not at any time have ye despised us. So may I draw you with all strengthenings hither.
go to ruin, he lives all his life, for whom these are put down, and who knows them thus. The waters are
earth. They are alive, refresh the livino, and are firmly rooted: may Agni heat them, after they have been poured
1. Three several words are uttered: kine are lowing cows. who give the milk:
4 In joy of this thou didst restore, for worship, the lowing company of hidden cattle.
She for the Sun hath left a path to travel we have arrived where men prolong existence.
7. Songs, Indra, active in their might, are beautified for thee, wherewith
13 All ye, the Gods whom Savitar the Father of truth, and Varuna and Mitra govern,
Emasculate yet claiming manly vigour, thus Vrtra lay with scattered limbs dissevered.
32 A hundred has the sage received, Dasa Balbutha's and Taruksa's gifts.
Acts of sacrifice, charity, and penance should be done in the mood of devotion to the Supreme Lord. If that consciousness has not been attained, then they should verily be performed as a matter of duty, without desire for reward. A mother abandons her selfish joys to perform her duty to her offspring. She offers the milk in her breast to her baby and nourishes the baby. She does not lose by giving to the child, rather she fulfills her motherhood. Similarly, a cow grazes grass in the meadow all day long, but yields the milk in her udder to her calf. The cow does not become any less by performing its duty; on the other hand, people hold it in greater respect. Because these activities are performed selflessly, they are viewed as sacred. Shree Krishna states in this verse that the wise should perform auspicious and beneficial acts in the same attitude of selflessness. He now explains the three kinds of renunciation in the following three verses.
final bath, Varuna is in the waters; verily straightway he appeases Varuna. After his return he should
Do thou by Mitra's and by Varuna's decree flow furthering the lofty rite:
Gracious be he the swelling Child of Waters, gracious be Prsni who hath Gods to guard her.
12 May he, the strong-necked Steer, waxing in vigour, gather the foeman's wealth with none to check
What all the Immortals have prepared with wisdom, Dyaus, Sire, Begetter, raining down true blessings.
4. The man who bringeth gifts to thee, bright God who fain wouldst lead to wealth,
37 And Syava too for me led forth a strong steed at Suvastu's ford:
7 That hero deed of Indra must be lauded for ever that he rent Ahi in pieces.
3 Ye are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, and helpers of the slow although he linger last.
5 Pleased, like a man, with our libation, Indra, drink, for enduring hero might, the Soma.
Throughout this Veda, the title of each of the following 1028 Mantras (Hymns) will be the name of the
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this my spouse.
2. From every habitation (of thine), O king Varuna, from here do thou free us! In that we have said, 'ye waters, ye
As sons invite a sire, that thou mayst get thee strength thee, bounteousest, to get thee strength.
4 Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast attained heaven's lustrous realm.
and Sarasvati, the Goddess of wisdom, come and sit down amidst us.
4 Yea, as thou flowest bring great store of food that we may win the spoil
that he pays reverence with (the hymn) of Vatsapri [6], he wins with it this world; in that he strides the
the close combat he conquered. The gods did make the talisman an armour of thousandfold strength.
8 Highest and lowest, men who stand between diem, going, returning, dwelling in contentment,
The dainty cates, the cooked mess; but One stronger transfixed the wild boar, shooting through the
5. I have surrounded thee with a clinging sugarcane, to remove aversion, so that thou shalt not be averse to me!
9 This, Brahmanaspati, is your laudation prayer hath been made to thunderwielding Indra.
10 O Lord of All (‘Prajapati’)! None except you pervades everything and every being. May our wishes,
10 Our Agni, thou art first among the Gods, and first mid living men.
Skilled in fair rites, with Soma poured, the Kanvas light thee, the oblation-wafting God.
have to be piled up again. 'With thy body, O Agni, worthy of sacrifice, come hither and mount', (with
5 How, and what bond of friendship with a mortal hath the God chosen as this morn is breaking?
The wise beheld this deed of thine: now go beyond their eulogies.
west, he would place the expiration in the inspiration, he would be liable to die. The Adhvaryu should
hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne for three days; verily is he propagated. To them
5 May your car-seat, down-gliding, golden-coloured, according to your wish approach our dwellings.
9. With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening things, wherewith,
says; that is according to the text. He severs it indeed when he makes what is connected with Varuna
takes him with the Puronuvakya, he gives him with the Yajya, and [5] establishes him with the Vasat
6 Ancient your home, auspicious is your friendship: Heroes, your wealth is with the house of Jahnu.
with their own share; verily they give him food; he becomes an eater of food. The cow is the sap of the
2 Who for the Fivefold People's take hath seated him in every home
4. He runs when one calls after him, This is the prayer of him who prays.
And many charms of charmers, All-Inspirer! have they laid in thee, Lord of true attendants!
find support in this world. The gods and the Asuras were in conflict. The gods in fear entered Agni;
He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, the Lord of Song.
30 Nearest and most attractive may our laud, O Indra come to thee.
2. Thou Pavamana, didst beget the Sun with might, and rain in the supporting sky,
1. ENJOY, O Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled ladle where we pour libation.
When Indra, joying in the draughts of Soma juice, forced the clouds, slaying Vrtra stayer of their flow.
4.1.2 Sukta 2 – Charm against excessive discharges from the Body
18 Whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty heaven,
8 Never do men attain, O Wonder-Worker, thy greatness, Mighty One, who must be lauded,
24. May Agni who cooks thee protect thee on the east, Indra with the Maruts protect thee on the south! May
1. In all the worlds That was the best and highest whence sprang the mighty one, of splendid valour,
8 Yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his goal, hath stepped the conquering Courser.
day would be as when one sits down to a cow which has already been milked; it would not be good
3. That might of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought together, like
syllables won the seven-footed Çakvari; Brhaspati with eight syllables won the Gayatri; Mitra with nine
rendered homage (to Agni), there, they say, is thy origin on high: do thou feel for us, and spare us, O takman!
18 Who have arranged thine altar Blessed God, at morn brought thine oblation, pressed the juice.
12 Wherewith ye made Rasa swell full with water-floods, and urged to victory the car without a horse;
5 With teeth of flame, wind-driven, through the wood he speeds, triumphant like a bull among the herd
k This is thy portion, O Rudra; rejoice in it; with it for food, do thou go away beyond the Mujavants.
O Indra, like a caldron cracked and seething, so he pours out foam.
3 Dear. to all Gods, this goat, the share of Pusan, is first led forward with the vigorous Courser,
with meat; he who knows thus does not become diseased of skin. There are five layers, he makes firm
Strike off, ye Twain, the heads of our assailants who with man's treacherous attack approach us.
their portions; they are at unity. He who desires a village should offer on eleven potsherds to Indra, and
7. Flow onward to our wealthy lords. Drive all our enemies away:
Banner of sacrifice, the good Protector, child of two births, the swiftly moving envoy.
21 In many a place, the same in look art thou, a Prince o'er all the tribes
Wise singers glorify with chanted praises these his achievements in Vivasvan's dwelling.
1. O Indra, hear Tirschi's call, the call of him who serveth thee.
1. STREWN is the sacred grass; come Vayu, to our feast, with team of thousands, come, Lord of the
(cup) the Çukra, the Manthin, the Agrayana, the (cup) for the All-gods, the Dhruva, the (cup) for
3 The God whom both these worlds brought forth for riches, whom heavenly Dhisana for our wealth
of the sacrifice resorts to him; (verily it serves) for continuity. He who piles up the fire falls away from
31 Come, Lord of rapturous, joys, to our libation with thy Bay Steeds, come
4 The Gods have made me bearer of oblations, who slipped away and passed through many troubles.
upon himself. To the gods the world of heaven [1] did not become manifest; they saw this Sodaçin, and
When, O ye Maruts, ye the host that send the rain, had harnessed to your cars the thought-fleet spotted
8. He that has fitted together thy joints with skill, as the wagoner (Ribhu) the joints of a chariot, to him go, there is
There stood the milch-kine with full-laden udders, and both paired Mighty Mothers of the Wondrous.
6 Most bright in splendour, flectest on their way, close-knit to glory, strong with varied power.
d To the Maruts, the playful, he offers a cake on seven potsherds at the rising of the sun; he ofibrs to
12 They who observing that the Horse is ready call out and say, the smell is good; remove it;
1. The many plants of hundredfold aspect, whose king is Soma, which have been begotten by Brihaspati, shall
to the Trayastrinça. The gods are three and thirty; verily in the gods they find support. There is a
10. One is on the hither side, the other on the farther side of the back of the heavens; secretly are deposited the
To him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to Agni go the songs of praise.
i Drink ghee, ye drinkers of ghee; drink fat, ye drinkers of fat.
6 Turn yourselves hitherward this day, ye Holy, that fearing in my heart I may approach you.
thou, a universal ruler! All the regions of the compass shall call thee, O king; attended and revered be thou here!
Dwelling enveloped deep within the waters, him who checked heaven and stayed the floods from
Piercing and brightly shining-at your glad carouse-served with trimmed grass at sacrifice. Thou waxest
Thou, Sage, with bright path, Lord of harnessed horses, impetuous, promptly honourest the prudent.
seasonal periods are seasonal periods. They are the children of the seasons, and therefore [1] they are
verily he has recourse to Brhaspati with his own share; verily he leads him to the top of his equals; the
3. As one pays off a sixteenth, an eighth, or an (entire) debt, thus do we transfer every evil dream upon our
hail! Like heavenly light, the light; hail! Like heavenly light, the sun; hail!'
11 O Savitar, thine ancient dustless pathways are well established in the air's midregion:
Then, loudly lowing, came the cows to Indu, the chosen, wellloved master in the beaker.
gods. Men appoint portions to him who knows thus. Creatures slew hunger, man at once, the gods at the
Men call on thee, lord of heroes, O Indra, amongst foes,
Drink of the pleasant juice and listen to our songs; lover of song, reward the hymn!
gifts. It is spotted, for it has Savitr as its deity [3]; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who desires food
o Homage to him of the wave, and to the roaring.
7 That same companionship of her, the Milch-cow, here with the strong Bull's divers forms they
Which, ceaseless, thrice a day shall yield us hero power enriched. with store of nourishment, and
When he was kindled, through his power and majesty his fiery splendour made the heavens and earth
The well-born friend hath carved his food with Vasus: in all his limbs he hath increased and prospered.
4 Among the skilful Gods most skilled is he, who made the two world-halves which bring prosperity to
Making his presence known by sunbeams, Surya hath filled the firmament and earth and heaven.
3 This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by strong oblation's power.
One is an eater of the uneaten, one an eater of the unoffered, one an eater of that which is gathered;
1. DRINK Soma juice for mighty power and vigour, drink, Strongest One, that thou mayst smite down
4 Pour out on us abundant food, when thou art pressed, O Indu wealth
wood) around; verily he produces it from its own birthplace, he does not produce a foe for him.
verily he wins four-footed cattle; two last; verily he wins two-footed (cattle); they make up an Anustubh;
This, better than the seven, hath-at your glad carouse-furthered the blind, the cripple. Thou art waxing
The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, the Sun hath filled the air and earth and heaven.
4 Wake up the willing Gods, since thou, Agni, performest embassage:
4 Your Lord of might that ne'er hath bent, that ruleth over all mankind,
When, O ye Deities, ye gave that Milch-cow to the Angirases,
sacrifice; verily by them do they proceed to the world of heaven. They mount the world of heaven
1. For first possession of your juice. for the exhilarating drink,
For me Rjrasva, like a youthful lover, hath. cut piecemeal one and a hundred wethers.
4 Let the man thrive who travails sore, in prayer, far thee the Bountiful.
the atmosphere. Thou art propping; for earth thee! Quicken earth. Thou art a prop; for rain thee!
That they may drink and eat invigorating food. So grant us health and strength and perfect innocence.
With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses, for him they quickly bring his food together.
Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, fierce and exceeding strong, stalwart and full of
The universe is a kaleidoscope of all the physical manifestations of the five elements of nature: earth, water, fire, air, and space. This ever-changing universe is called adhibhuta. Although the devatas or the celestial gods administer the different departments of the universe, God has sovereignty, even over the devatas. He is Virāṭ Purusha, the complete cosmic personality who encompasses the entire material creation. Hence, God is called Adhidaiva.Shree Krishna says that as the Supreme Soul or Paramatma,He dwells in the hearts of all living beings of the universe. He is the one who bestows rewards for all our actions and the presiding divinity for all the yajna (sacrifices). Thus, He is also called Adhiyajna, or the Lord of all sacrifices. Therefore, all yajna should be performed; for the satisfaction of this Supreme Divine Personality.So far, Shree Krishna has answered six out of the seven questions concerning the meanings of the various terms Arjun had asked at the beginning of this chapter. In the next few verses, Shree Krishna will answer Arjun’s seventh question regarding the moment of death.
Drink of this meath, Wealth-givers, joined with Indra with whom ye are in full accord, ye Princes.
13 Thunder, the lightning's daughter, Aja-Ekapad, heaven's bearer, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea:
27. These pure and clear sacrificial women (the waters) I put into the hands of the Brâhmanas severally. With
Whom, Bull with hair of flame the people must observe, the people that he speed them on.
world of heaven. As they went to the world of heaven, the quarters were confused; they put down two in
71. I am the man; you are the woman. I am the song; you are the lyric. I am the sky; you are the Earth. We two
this is one milking of the sacrifice, another is in the Ida. When the Hotr utters the name of the sacrificer,
15. May all the gods come over: the oblation is pleasing to Trishamdhi. Adhere to the great compact under which
to do so, one would be impotent. The nights of the half-month were the wives of King Soma; of these be
1. MAY Visnu form and mould the womb, may Tvastar duly shape the forms,
verse for sacrifice to the gods.' The theologians say, 'The gods have been sacrificed to; what gods are
rite). There are Atiratras on either side, for securing splendour and food.
power, and strength in himself. Those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of fifteen nights overcome
made Agni his guardian, for the smiting away of the Raksases, he sleeps. Now, if a man who is
Vasistha, his sons slain, desired, 'May I win offspring, and defeat the Sauddsas.' He saw this (rite) of
With whom the toiling worshipper, by praises, hymning and lauding, soon attained to riches.
21 This Indra, Vrtra-slayer, this Rbhuksan, even at his birth, was meet for invocation.
34 All this hath he accomplished, yea, Indra, most gloriously renowned,
Like tillers of the ground when they are sowing seed, they mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minish it.
Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade: with him who pours no juice he seeks not friendship.
2. Flow on, O Soma, radiant for the Gods, blissful to heaven and earth and living things!
that he eats the sacrificer's portion, he fills himself. The sacrifice is the size of the sacrificer's portion, the
6. Hear, Agni who hast ears to hear, with all thy train of escort Gods!
To Morning, Agni, when she comes refulgent, thou goest forth soliciting fair riches.
Who measured out the ancient seat, who pillared both the worlds apart as the Unborn supported
He who with sacrifices worships Indra is lord of wealth, law-born and law's protector.
of seventeen nights, become eaters of food. There is a period of five days; the seasons are five in the
him set thee free', he says; Who (ka) is Prajapati; verily by Prajapati he yokes him, by Prajapati he lets
2 Light rolls your easy chariot faring earthward, what time, for food, ye, full of wisdom, mount it.
4.6.24 Sukta 24 – Dropsy, Heart Disease, and kindred maladies cured by flowing Water
19 I will call hither brightly-beaming Agni, the Herald, all-supporting, best at worship.
15 Nay, do not die, Pururavas, nor vanish: let not the evil-omened wolves devour thee.
1. DULY enkindled after ancient customs, bringing all treasures, he is balmed with unguents,Flame-haired, oil-clad, the purifying Agni, skilled in fair rites, to bring the Gods for worship.
6 In battles be victorious. We seek thee, Lord of Hundred Powers,
Having said that the great souls engage in His devotion, Shree Krishna now explains how they do bhakti. He says that devotees become attached to kīrtan as a means of practicing their devotion and enhancing it. The chanting of the glories of the Lord is called kīrtan, which is defined as: nāma-līlā-guṇadīnām uchchair-bhāṣhā tu kīrtanam (Bhakti Rasāmṛit Sindhu 1.2.145) “Singing glories of the Names, Forms, Qualities, Pastimes, Abodes, and Associates of God is called kīrtan.”Kīrtan is one of the most powerful means of practicing devotion. It involves the three-fold devotion of śhravaṇa (hearing), kīrtan (chanting), and smaraṇa (remembering). The goal is to fix the mind upon God, but it becomes easier when done alongside with hearing and chanting. As stated in chapter six, the mind is as restless as the wind, and naturally wanders from thought to thought. Hearing and chanting engage the knowledge senses in the divine realm, which helps in repeatedly bringing back the mind from its wanderings.Kīrtan has many other benefits as well. Often when people practice devotion through japa (chanting of mantra or Name of God on rosary beads) or plain meditation, they find themselves overwhelmed by sleep. However, kīrtan is such an engaging process that it usually drives sleep away. Also, chanting blocks out distracting sounds from the environment. Kīrtan can be practiced in groups which enables mass participation. In addition, the mind desires variety, which it gets through the medium of kīrtan in the form of the Names, Virtues, Pastimes, Abodes, etc. of God. And since kīrtan involves loud chanting, the divine vibrations of the Names of God make the entire environment auspicious and holy.For all these reasons, kīrtan has been the most popular form of devotion amongst saints in Indian history. All the famous bhakti Saints—Soordas, Tulsidas, Meerabai, Guru Nanak, Kabir, Tukaram, Ekanath, Narsi Mehta, Jayadev, Tyagaraja, and others—were great poets. They composed numerous devotional songs, and through them, they engaged in chanting, hearing, and remembering.The Vedic scriptures particularly extol kīrtan as the simplest and most powerful process of devotion in the present age of Kali.kṛite yad dhyāyato viṣhṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥdwāpare paricharyāyāṁ kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt (Bhagavatam 12.3.52)“The best process of devotion in the age of Satya was simple meditation upon God. In the age of Tretā, it was the performance of sacrifices for the pleasure of God. In the age of Dwāpar, worship of the deities was the recommended process. In the present age of Kali, it is kīrtan alone.”avikārī vā vikārī vā sarva doṣhaika bhājanaḥparameṣha padaṁ yāti rāma nāmānukīrtanāt (Adhyātma Ramayan)“Whether you are full of desires or free from them, devoid of defects or full of them, if you engage in kīrtan of the names of Lord Ram, you will attain the highest destination.”sarva dharma bahirbhūtaḥ sarva pāparatasthathāmuchyate nātra sandeho viṣhṇornamānukīrtanāt (Vaiśhampāyan Samhitā)“Even those who are deeply sinful and bereft of religiosity can be saved by the chanting of the names of Lord Vishnu; of this, there is no doubt.”kalijuga kevala hari guna gāhā, gāvata nara pāvahiṅ bhava thāhā (Ramayan)“In this age of Kali, there is one means of salvation. By engaging in the chanting of the glories of God, one can cross over this material ocean.”However, one must remember that in the process of kīrtan, hearing and chanting are helpers. The essence is to remember God. If we leave it out, the kīrtan will not purify the mind. Thus, Shree Krishna says here that His devotees do kīrtan, while constantly engaging the mind in thinking of Him. They practice this with great determination for the purification of the mind.
So come to us with most auspicious favour, and give us health and strength without a trouble.
a I yoke thee in bonds of fellowship with Indra and Agni, with the ghee sprinklings, with brilliance, with
13 I follow with success upon the path of Law the two celestial Hotars, Priests of oldest time.
4.7.13 Sukta 13 – Charm to deprive enemies of their Strength
they follow forward the breath, they follow back the breath. The Agrayana is Prajapati, the Upançu is
5 O Soma, gladden Varuna and Mitra; cheer, Indu Pavamana! Indra, Visnu.
And he himself hath been. through night's thick darkness, made manifest by light, the Purifier.
partake [4], but of other sap at will. He appealed to a concourse of women, 'Take the third of my guilt.'
Ye urged to speed the currents of the rivers, and many seas have ye filled full with waters.
3. With those to his libation poured, ye heroes, Indra, Agni, come:
truth of holy order' [4], he says; the truth of holy order is the quarters; verily he conquers the quarters.
His fulgent flames run forth like vigorous horses; all creatures are affrighted when he blazes.
these (nights), placing the Viraj in themselves, win food, grow great with offspring and cattle, and attain
He who gives vital power goes on unswerving. Prsni the Bull hath milked the pure wiiite udder.
Who sends a song effectual, firmly-grasping, and strength-bestowing, he comes near the mighty.
d To us from the sky, from the great [1] mountain;
4. Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar thy way
8. Rohita did ponder the multiform (universe) while preparing (his) climbings and advances. Having ascended the
may all evil go away from me, and mav possessions come to me!
8 While flowing, meet for sacrifice, he hath gone up to heaven across
Due to his anxiety, the Pandava army seemed much larger to Duryodhan than it actually was. He had never expected his opponents would mobilize an army of warriors with such military prowess, who would be formidable in battle. Out of fear of the looming catastrophe, he started enumerating the names of all the mahārathīs (warriors who were singly equivalent in strength to ten thousand ordinary warriors) gathered on the Pandava side. They were all exceptional heroes, and great military commanders, equivalent in valor to his cousins Arjun and Bheem.
1. BRING sacrificial gifts to him, Omniscient, for he longs to drink,
30 Then, verify, they see the light refulgent of primeval seed,
b He, for whom, O Agni, thou dost make, O wise one,
When his terrific flames have reached the Immortal's world, then men remember and extol the
7 That Indra whom nor months nor autumn seasons wither with age, nor fleeting days enfeeble,Still may his body Wax, e'en now so mighty, glorified by the lauds and hymns that praise him.
4. With the incantation of Asita, of Kasyapa, and of Gaya do I cover up thy fortune, as women cover (something)
For thou with might givest much food in cattle even to the wicked wolf when he is hungry.
2 The many sages utter words in unison, while into Indra's throat they pour the Soma juice,
Rohita who knows the (heavenly) light, kindled through prayer, carried out the sacrifice.
Maghavan made the three that gleam with moisture, and to his home brought Kuyavac to slay him.
14 O Asvins, Wonder-Workers, Lords of lustre, where and with what folk do ye delight yourselves today?
8 Car-bearer is the name of his oblation, whercon are laid his Weapons and his Armour.
horses', he says; for (he placed) strength in horses. 'Milk in kine', he says; for (he placed) milk in kine.
song, he would confer his voice on the Udgatr [5], and his voice would fail. The theologians say, 'The
Let these be oxen unto thee, let these be bulls and kine to thee.
5 What sacrifice, Adityas, ye Heroes guide by the path direct,May that come nigh unto your thought.
1. The varied food which I consume in many places, my gold, my horses, and, too, my cows, goats, and sheep:
dwelling place,From these the eyeless and the deaf have turned aside: the wicked travel not the pathway of the Law.
Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade: then shall we two smite dead full many a foeman.
That which in Ausija's abode lies hidden, to come forth for delight and for devotion.
4 Even as he mounted up they all adorned him: self-luminous he travels clothed in splendour.
chariot are yoked five hundred horses and whose renown is spread in all directions.
Who, for the sacrifice's ancient lover, turneth you hither, Asvins, offering homage?
6 Mid mortal men godless have secreted the King of all who live, home of the people.
I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen with my prayer thy vital vigour.
2 So hast thou mounted up before us, Surya, through these our praises, with fleet dappled horses.
men have served thee in many and sundry spots, parting, as 'twere, an aged father's wealth.
To loose the floods, to seek, for kine, the battle, his Bays he mounted boldly seized the booty.
own share; verily he moves for him the great sacrifice from the ends, and the great sacrifice resorts to
11 May it convey me evermore: may the light chariot pass from men
6 And let the two exalted Heavenly Ladies, Morning and Night, like a cow good at milking,
9 Horns made of gold hath he: his feet are iron: less fleet than he, though swift as thought, is Indra.
Our wealthy patrons who bestow rich gifts on us of steeds and kine, high-born! delightful with thy
for us, O earth: waylayers shall not find us, hold far away (their) murderous weapon!
conquereth and is unconquered, the soma-drinking bull that frees from danger, fasten the amulet upon thee: may
1. The rapture-shedding Somas have flowed forth in our assembly, pressed.
Arjun has rejoiced upon hearing Shree Krishna’s vibhūtis, as well as knowledge about the Supreme Personality, and he feels that his illusion is now dispelled. He has accepted that Shree Krishna is not merely his best friend, but also the Supreme Divine Personality, who is the source of all opulence in the world. Now in this chapter, he begins by gratefully acknowledging Shree Krishna’s compassion in revealing such invaluable knowledge.
e Thou art the head of sky, the navel of earth, the holder apart of the quarters, the lady paramount of the
In the same way, most people may appear to be equally endowed with eyes and ears, and yet their
8. She curves her spine while longing in her heart for her son, her husband, and her kin, when (a man) has been
not a translation of the original khanamanah khanitraib (ligonibus fodiens) which Sayana explains by
3. Yon fluttering little spirit that has been fixed into thy heart, from it the jealousy do I remove, as air from a waterskin.
elsewhere, by means of King Soma, we keep within us'; verily he keeps his mind in himself [2], his
b Smite away, O Indra, the mind of him who hateth us,
The kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens, earths sent their loud voices out.
5 O Agni, radiant One, to whom the holy oil is poured, bum up
3. Pouring all glories hither, he, effused, hath passed within the jar: Indu on Indra is bestowed.
Whom Dawns shall strengthen when the night departeth, Indra whom days shall strengthen, months,
Oft through desire to rain coming with storm of hail, roaring in onset, violent and exceeding strong.
it serves) to obtain Prajapati. He draws with (a vessel) of Udumbara; the Udumbara is strength; verily he
the burnt; verily by his own share he pacifies him and indicates his foes; whomsoever of those near
It is said that the good are drawn to the good and the bad to the bad. Those in tamo guṇa are drawn toward ghosts and spirits, despite the evil and cruel nature of such beings. Those who are rājasic get drawn to the yakṣhas (semi-celestial beings who exude power and wealth) and rākṣhasas (powerful beings who embody sensual enjoyment, revenge, and wrath). They even offer the blood of animals to appease these lower beings, with faith in the propriety of such lowly worship. Those who are imbued with sattva guṇa become attracted to the worship of celestial gods in whom they perceive the qualities of goodness. However, worship is perfectly directed when it is offered to God.
15 The most respectable, the imperishable and the most righteous Devas were prayed by Manu, the
11 O Thunderer, never have our prayers gone forth to any God but thee:
1. WITH Agni and with Indra, Visnu. Varuna, with the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, closely leagued;
May it come near his heart and make it stir with love, as a fond well-dressed matron clings about her
Then, giving life to Sun and Dawn and Heaven, thou foundest not one foe to stand against thee.
4.4.18 Sukta 18 – Charm with the Apamarga plant, against Sorcery, Demons and Enemies
offers on five potsherds; it should be made on eight potsherds; the Gayatri has eight syllables, Agni is
sacrifice, to break the sameness and to make a pair. Agni was in yonder world, Yama in this. The gods
worlds. These (nights) are thirty in number, the Viraj has thirty syllables; verily by the Viraj they win
f Thou art the caul of kingly power, thou art the womb of kingly power.
4 Dear wealth be Aryaman to us, Varuna dear wealth meet for praise:
6 Thou, Vayu, who hast none before thee, first of all hast right to drink these offerings of Soma juice,
like chariots, to the sea, like chariots showing forth their strength.
syllables herein are seven, the Çakvari has seven Padas, the thunder bolt is connected with the Çakvari;
2 O Agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou passing-wise who knowest every ordinance.
O King, discerning truth and right from falsehood, come and be Lord and Ruler of my kingdom.
Maruts; the bright, the ruddy woolled, the white, are for Sarasvati; the piebald, the grey piebald, the
6 When, Maghavan, thou honourest the worshipper, no one is there to stay thy wealth.
1. May Vatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwelling-place!
1. RICH in all blessings, Asvins come ye hither: this place on earth is called your own possession,
metres he makes him well. He puts Dhatr in the middle, it is not in order in the middle of him whose
6 Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as Indra striking down the car of Usas.
unites him with the waters and the plants. 'Ye divine waters, this is thy foetus', he says; that is according
When, gracious, for the hymn he brings forth food and wealth, the glowing Sun untroubled sends forth
7 O Agni, with thy lofty beams, with thy pure brilliancy, O God,
3 Do thou, O Maghavan, beat off these sorceresses' daring strength.
16 Soma, do thou most rich in sweets, a gladdening drink most dear to Gods,
14 Disclose to us O Hero, wealth in thousands both of kine and steeds.
the gods, Indra and Agni, may I be powerful and an eater of food', he says; verily he becomes powerful
2. Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom many laud:
consecrated sleeps, he does something that as it were is contrary to his vow. I Thou, O Agni, art the
o O ye waters, goddesses, purifying and pure, do ye bring the gods; may we, pure and served (by you),
6 One who is Lord of Suca, Lord of Suca caring for herself:
9 Indu as, Indra's Friend, on us pour with a stream of sweetness, like
9 Allied by worship, let him give man knowledge: by an extended cord they lead him onward.
b O Agni, drive away those foes of ours that are born with force;
11 Fed with our fuel, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
7 Drink of this meath, O Indra, thou, and Visnu; drink ye your fill of Soma, Wonder-Workers.
28 Ascend your car with golden seat, O Asvins, and with reins of gold,
Hitherward come thy path that leads to riches: may we find shelter in thy favour, Indra.
they became Kharjuras; their sap rose upwards, they became Kariras; the Kariras are connected with
which he put down on the left [3] became the left side, that is the northern quarter; (the brick) which he
9 O Indra, grant a happy home, a triple refuge triply strong.
12 And both these Goddesses, Earth, Heaven, Lord of the beauteous helm! revere
6 Your Mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water even as earth is purified from heaven.
1. Sung is the song of ancient time: to Indra have ye said the prayer.
3 Hither let Indra come from earth or heaven, hither with speech from firmament or ocean;
From the abode of holy order, from the birthplace of immortality.
2 Great art thou, Mighty Lord, through manly vigour, O fierce One, gathering spoil, subduing others,
to the ocean, hail!' he says verily thus he produces seed [1]. 'Go to the atmosphere, hail!' he says; verily
3. Be he our own, or be he strange, the kinsman, or the foreianer, who bear enmity towards us, those enemies of
5 A Bull begat the Bull for joy of battle, and a strong Mother brought forth him the manly.
2 What time the Rbus had with care and marvels done proper service to assist their Parents,
been prepared on the fire, hold together, O man and wife, that ye may guard it!
herein', he says; verily continuing the sacrifice he points it out to the gods. 'Seven are thy kindlingsticks, O Agni, seven thy tongues' [3], he says, for sevenfold in seven-wise are the dear forms of Agni;
1. O Bhava and Sarva, be merciful, do not attack (us); ye lords of beings, lords of cattle, reverence be to you
Who, Vigorous one, hath drawn to him the hearts of all, drawn them, the Vigorous One, the God.
2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyaus the Asura, those heroes,
18 The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire not sleep
Often, in the course of his teachings, Shree Krishna explains a concept in a few verses, and then states a verse summarizing those teachings. This verse is a summary of the instructions on the immortality of the self, and its distinction from the body.
falls of the oblation is (thus) not lost. He encircles (it) with fire thrice, for the sacrifice is thrice repeated;
4 Strength-giving streams bear hither him eternal, fain to support the mighty work. of Tvastar.
farther than the near', he says, for he finds it nearer than the farther, farther than the near. 'I welcome
1. BY your high Law firm order is established there where they loose for travel Surya's horses.
becomes holy or perishes. His vow is: he shall not speak untruth; be shall not eat meat; he shall not
13 Thus having drunk your fill of our libation, win us all kinds of wealth, Indra and Agni.
12 The shelters which ye have for him who lauds you, bestow them threefold on the man who offers.
quarter; (the brick) which he put down behind became the tail, that is the western quarter; (the brick)
sacrifice does so with the wish, 'May it be in my offspring.' If they omit the Ekavinça Stoma, his support
5 Indra, bear Kutsa, him in whom thou joyest: the dark-red horses of the Wind are docile.
4 Indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the vigour of these men,
6 True are all these thy deeds, O Most Heroic. The Milch-kine issued from the streaming udder.
2 Lord of Bay Steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee: this we crave. Here the disposers wait on thee.
5 These are the kine which, Sarama, thou seekest, flying, O Blest One, to the ends of heaven.
7 Votaries, richly-gifted, deck him with their songs, even as the steed who draws the car.
For good, in his assembly, is this care of ours. Let us not, in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm!
He goes erect, as seeking kine in stream, with light, to sacrifice.
2. Whate'er, in this perpetual course, we sacrifice to God and God,
Rastrabhrts are the kingdom, and for the kingdom do they strive who go to battle together; he for whom
5 Deeming him a reproach, his mother hid him, Indra, endowed with all heroic valour.
Bring him the juice poured forth in sacrifice to-day! Now range you by the glorious one!
Eaters of strengthening food who merit worship, O ye Five Tribes, be pleased with mine oblation.
What time the Potent One rent Vrtra with his strength, who held the waters back, whom darkness
1. GREAT as he was, Soma hath gained strength by this high solemnity:
The foes that were fain to deceive could not [5] deceive.
1. Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward, north and south,
he desire, 'May Parjanya rain', he should put it on downwards, verily he brings down rain; if he desire,
Whose foresight keeps the Law from violation, excellent, pure-tongued, bringing thousands, Agni.
King, may I never lack well-ordered riches. Loud may we speak, with heroes, in assembly.
Shree Krishna reiterates that His devotees reach Him quickly. Firstly, with the personal form of God as the object of their devotion, they easily focus their mind and senses upon Him. They engage their tongue and ears in chanting and hearing the divine Names of God, their eyes in seeing the image of His divine form, their body in performing actions for His pleasure, their mind in thinking of His wonderful Pastimes and Virtues, and their intellect in contemplating upon His Glories. In this way, they quickly unite their consciousness with God.Secondly, since such devotees continuously offer their hearts in uninterrupted bhakti, God quickly bestows His grace upon them and removes the obstacles on their path. For those who are in communion with Him, He dispels their ignorance with the lamp of knowledge. In this way, God Himself becomes the Savior of His devotees and delivers them from mṛityu saṁsāra sāgarāt (the cycle of life and death).
4 This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, where, like milch-cows, the kine order the
Gaya, the priestly singer, with his praises and hymns contented the Celestial people.
His team of harnessed horses waits on Vayu, and, foremost, on the radiant Treasure-bearer.
7 Agni, give us great wealth, give riches thousandfold. unclose to us, like doors, strength that shall
1. MAN'S worship of the Gods hath three great lustres, and three celestial lights have they established
8. Thou (scorpion) that strikest with both, with mouth as well as tail, in thy mouth there is no poison: then what can
him [2]. The oblations of him whose realm is not in order are disordered; he should take off the right
5 Who separate my young bull from the cattle, they whose protector was in truth no stranger?
2. O bracelet, open up the womb, that the embryo be put (into it)! Do thou, O limit (-setting bracelet), furnish a
7 Shield thee with flesh against the flames of Agni, encompass thee about with fat and marrow,
20. May the white-footed (arrow?) fly to yonder lines of the enemy, may yonder armies of the enemies be to-day
In the middle of the sky is the dappled stone set down
2. Ye, heroes, have bestowed wonderful nourishment: send it to him whose songs are sweet.
Be our oblation-bearer and preceder: thou hast lain long enough in during darkness.
22. As splendour is in the agnihotra-oblation, as splendour is in the call vashat, thus shall the amulet of varana
15 The mortal man who serves the God Agni within his own abode,
I brought another low, with strength I bent his strength: I let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power.
2 Ye Asvins, rich in wondrous deeds, ye heroes worthy of our praise,
12. Scare them forth, let them tremble; bewilder the enemies with fright! With thy broad embrace, with the clasp of
1. LET songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race,
i Ye have made me, who am not younger, the younger;
of Durva grass he puts down, to support animals; with two (verses), for support. 'Arising from every
Loving the Gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing to our quadrupeds and bipeds.
4 May those most powerful steeds and chariot bring you, O Asvins, hither at the break of morning.
third) piece of firewood. The Brahmakârin. fills the worlds with his firewood, his girdle, his asceticism, and his
8 On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durva grass spring up
20 We summon Indra to the draught, irl whom all glories rest, in whom
Kind be the pious skilful-handed Rbhus, kind be the Fathers at our invocations.
of cattle; verily by the symbol he wins cattle [1]. The sacrifice went away from the gods in the form of
Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious: they of themselves advance like one who guards the
4. As the mouth of him that hath not drunk dries tip, thus languish thou with love for me, with parched mouth pass
6 So, to increase our wealth to-day, Inspirer, best of Furtherers,
In the offering do thou teach thy comrades, O faithful one;
they perform the Mahavrata after the Chandomas, they find support in cattle and in food.
what is unlimited; that tree which has fruit is strong among trees, the reed bears fruit, (the spade) is of
2 Even to the dull and uninspired Indra, gives vital power, and wins
O Usas, waken up for me the sounds of joy: send us the riches of the great.
4. Drive them away, O Kâma, thrust them away, O Kâma; may they that are my enemies fall into trouble! When
41 O Tndra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipitous:
they have put into the field, that do I hurl back again.
3 What satisfaction do our hymns afford thee? When, Maghavan? Now let us do thee service.
To gain knowledge of the kṣhetra and kṣhetrajña is not merely an intellectual exercise. Unlike bookish knowledge that can be cultivated without a change in one’s character, the spiritual knowledge that Shree Krishna is talking about requires purification of the heart. (Here, heart does not refer to the physical organ. The inner apparatus of mind and intellect is also sometimes referred to as the heart.) These five verses describe the virtues, habits, behaviors, and attitudes that purify one’s life and illuminate it with the light of knowledge.Humbleness. When we become proud of the attributes of our individual field, such as beauty, intellect, talent, strength, etc. we forget that God has given all these attributes to us. Pride thus results in distancing our consciousness from God. It is a big obstacle on the path of self-realization since it contaminates the entire field by affecting the qualities of the mind and intellect.Freedom from hypocrisy. The hypocrite develops an artificial external personality. A person is defective from inside, but creates a facade of virtuosity on the outside. Unfortunately, the external display of virtues is skin-deep and hollow.Non-violence. The cultivation of knowledge requires respect for all living beings. This requires the practice of non-violence. Hence the scriptures state: ātmanaḥ pratikūlāni pareśhāṁ na samācharet “If you dislike a certain behavior from others, do not behave with them in that manner yourself.”Forgiveness. It is freedom from ill will even toward those who have harmed one. Actually, harboring ill will harms oneself more than the other. By practicing forgiveness, a person of discrimination releases the negativities in the mind and purifies it.Simplicity. It is straightforwardness in thought, speech, and action. Straightforwardness in thought includes absence of deceit, envy, crookedness, etc. Straightforwardness in speech includes absence of taunt, censure, gossip, ornamentation, etc. Straightforwardness in action includes plainness in living, forthrightness in behavior, etc.Service of the Guru. Spiritual knowledge is received from the Guru. This imparting of divine knowledge requires the disciple to have an attitude of dedication and devotion toward the Guru. By serving the Guru, the disciple develops humbleness and commitment that enables the Guru to impart knowledge. Thus, Shree Krishna explained to Arjun in verse 4.34: “Learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him with reverence and render service unto him. Such an enlightened saint can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”Cleanliness of body and mind. Purity should be both internal and external. The Śhāṇdilya Upaniṣhad states: śhauchaṁ nāma dwividhaṁ-bāhyamāntaraṁ cheti (1.1) “There are two types of cleanliness—internal and external.” External cleanliness is helpful in maintaining good health, developing discipline, and uncluttering the mind. But mental cleanliness is even more important, and it is achieved by focusing the mind on the all-pure God. Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj states:māyādhīn malīn mana, hai anādi kālīn,hari virahānala dhoya jala, karu nirmala bani dīn. (Bhakti Śhatak verse 79)“The material mind is dirty since endless lifetimes. Purify it in the fire of longing for God, while practicing utmost humility.”Steadfastness. Self-knowledge and God-realization are not goals that are attainable in a day. Steadfastness is the persistence to remain on the path until the goal is reached. The scriptures state: charaivaite charaivate, charan vai madhu vindati “Keep moving forward. Keep moving forward. Those who do not give up will get the honey at the end.”Self-control. It is the restraint of the mind and the senses from running after mundane pleasures that dirty the mind and intellect. Self-control prevents the dissipation of the personality through indulgence.Dispassion toward the objects of the senses. It is a stage higher than the self-control mentioned above, in which we restrain ourselves by force. Dispassion means a lack of taste for sense pleasures that are obstacles on the path of God-realization.Absence of egotism. Egotism is the conscious awareness of “I,” “me,” and “mine.” This is classified as nescience because it is at the bodily level, arising out of the identification of the self with the body. It is also called the aham chetanā (pride arising out of the sense of self). All mystics emphatically declare that to invite God into our hearts, we must get rid of the pride of the self. jaba maiṅ thā taba hari nathīṅ, ab hari hai, maiṅ nāhīṅ prem galī ati sankarī, yā meṅ dwe na samāhīṅ (Saint Kabir)“When ‘I’ existed, God was not there; now God exists and ‘I’ do not. The path of divine love is very narrow; it cannot accommodate both ‘I’ and God.”In the path of jñāna-yog and aṣhṭāṅg-yog, there are elaborate sādhanās for getting rid of the aham chetanā. But in the path of bhakti-yog, it gets eliminated very simply. We add dās (servant) in front of aham (the sense of self), making it dāsoham (I am the servant of God). Now the “I” no longer remains harmful and self-consciousness is replaced by God-consciousness.Keeping in mind the evils of birth, disease, old-age and death. If the intellect is undecided about what is more important—material enhancement or spiritual wealth—then it becomes difficult to develop the strong will required for acquiring knowledge of the self. But when the intellect is convinced about the unattractiveness of the world, it becomes firm in its resolve. To get this firmness, we should constantly contemplate about the miseries that are an inseparable part of life in the material world. This is what set the Buddha on the spiritual path. He saw a sick person, and thought, “O there is sickness in the world. I will also have to fall sick one day.” Then He saw an old person, and thought, “There is also old age. This means that I will also become old one day.” After that, He saw a dead person, and realized, “This is also a part of existence. It means that I too will have to die one day.” The Buddha’s intellect was so perceptive that one exposure to these facts of life made Him renounce worldly existence. Since we do not have such decisive intellects, we must repeatedly contemplate on these facts to allow the unattractiveness of the world to sink in.Non-attachment. It means dispassion toward the world. We have only one mind and if we wish to engage it in pursuing spiritual goals, we have to detach it from material objects and persons. The sādhak replaces worldly attachment with love and attachment toward God.Absence of clinging to spouse, children, home, and so on. These are areas where the mind easily becomes attached. In bodily thinking, one spontaneously identifies with the family and home as “mine.” Thus, they linger upon the mind more often and attachment to them shackles the mind to material consciousness. Attachment causes expectations of the kind of behavior we want from family members, and when these expectations are not met, it leads to mental anguish. Also inevitably, there is separation from the family, either temporarily, if they go to another place, or permanently, if they die. All these experiences and their apprehensions begin to weigh heavily upon the mind and drag it away from God. Hence, if we seek immortal bliss, we must practice prudence while interacting with the spouse, child, and home, to prevent the mind from becoming entangled. We must do our duty toward them, without attachment, as a nurse does her duty in the hospital, or as a teacher does her duty toward her students in the school.Even-mindedness amidst desired and undesired events in life. Pleasurable and painful events come without invitation, just as the night and the day. That is life. To rise above these dualities, we must learn to enhance our spiritual strength through detachment toward the world. We must develop the ability to remain unperturbed by life’s reversals and also not get carried away with the euphoria of success.Constant and exclusive devotion toward Me. Mere detachment means that the mind is not going in the negative direction. But life is more than merely preventing the undesirable. Life is about engaging in the desirable. The desirable goal of life is to consecrate it at the lotus feet of God. Therefore, Shree Krishna has highlighted it here.Inclination for solitary places. Unlike worldly people, devotees are not driven by the need for company to overcome feelings of loneliness. They naturally prefer solitude that enables them to engage their mind in communion with God. Hence, they are naturally inclined to choosing solitary places, where they are able to more deeply absorb themselves in devotional thoughts.Aversion for mundane society. The sign of a materialistic mind is that it finds pleasure in talks about worldly people and worldly affairs. One who is cultivating divine consciousness develops a natural distaste for these activities, and thus avoids mundane society. At the same time, if it is necessary to participate in it for the sake of service to God, the devotee accepts it and develops the strength to remain mentally unaffected by it.Constancy in spiritual knowledge. To theoretically know something is not enough. One may know that anger is a bad thing but may still give vent to it repeatedly. We have to learn to practically implement spiritual knowledge in our lives. This does not happen by hearing profound truths just once. After hearing them, we must repeatedly contemplate upon them. Such mulling over the divine truths is the constancy in spiritual knowledge that Shree Krishna is talking about.Philosophical pursuit of the Absolute Truth. Even animals engage in the bodily activities of eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. However, God has especially blessed the human form with the faculty of knowledge. This is not to enable us to engage in bodily activities in a deluxe way, but for us to contemplate upon the questions: “Who am I? Why am I here? What is my goal in life? How was this world created? What is my connection with the Creator? How will I fulfill my purpose in life?” This philosophic pursuit of the truth sublimates our thinking above the animalistic level and brings us to hear and read about the divine science of God-realization.All the virtues, habits, behaviors, and attitudes described above lead to the growth of wisdom and knowledge. The opposite of these are vanity, hypocrisy, violence, vengeance, duplicity, disrespect for the Guru, uncleanliness of body and mind, unsteadiness, lack of self-control, longing for sense objects, conceit, entanglement in spouse, children, home, etc. Such dispositions cripple the development self-knowledge. Thus, Shree Krishna calls them ignorance and darkness.
18 O Indra this Vrsakapi hath found a slain wild animal,
Send to us all intelligence arid wisdom O Maghavan, be he who gives us cattle.
10 E'en the Celestial Axe bows down before him, and the Earth, lover-like, gives way to Indra.
Agni. 'Ye are the two male ones', he says, for they are the two male ones [2]. 'Thou art Urvaçi, thou art
In this verse, Shree Krishna compares karm sanyās and karm-yog. It is a very deep verse; so let’s understand it one word at a time.A karm yogi is one who does both, spiritual and social, duties. Social duties are done with the body while the mind is attached to God. Jagadguru Kripaluji Maharaj states:sochu mana yaha karm mama saba lakhata hari guru pyāre (Sādhan Bhakti Tattva)“Dear one! Think always that all your actions are being observed by God and Guru.” This is the sādhanā of karm-yog, by which we gradually elevate ourselves from bodily consciousness to spiritual consciousness.Karm sanyās is for elevated souls, who have already risen beyond the bodily platform. A karm sanyāsī is one who discards social duties due to complete absorption in God, and engages entirely in the performance of spiritual duties (devotional service to God). This sentiment of karm sanyās was nicely expressed by Lakshman, when Lord Ram asked him to fulfill his worldly duties:more sabai eka tumha swāmī, dīnabandhu ura antarayāmī (Ramayan)Lakshman said to Ram, “You are my Master, Father, Mother, Friend, and everything. I will only fulfill my duty toward You with all my might. So please do not tell me about any of my bodily duties.”Those who practice karm sanyās do not consider themselves to be the body, and as a result, they do not feel obligated to discharge their bodily duties. Such karm sanyāsīs dedicate their full time and energy to spirituality, while karm yogis have to split their time between worldly and spiritual duties. The karm sanyāsīs can thus move much faster toward God, while the karm yogis are encumbered with social duties.However, in this verse, Shree Krishna extols karm-yog beyond karm sanyās and recommends it to Arjun as the preferred path. This is because karm sanyāsīs are exposed to a danger. If, having renounced their duties they cannot absorb their mind in God, they are left neither here nor there. In India, there are tens of thousands of such sadhus, who felt they were detached, and thus, renounced the world, but their mind was not yet attached to God. Consequently, they could not experience the divine bliss of the spiritual path. And so, although wearing the saffron clothes of mendicants, they indulge in grossly sinful activities such as smoking opium. Only the ignorant mistake their sloth as detachment from the world.On the other hand, karm yogis do both their worldly duties and spiritual practice. So if their mind turns away from spirituality, at least they have their work to fall back upon. Karm-yog is thus the safer path for majority of the people, while karm sanyās is only to be pursued under the expert guidance of a Guru.
he makes him possessed of wealth; he becomes possessed of wealth. When battle is joined, he should
Sharing the riches sent from lofty heaven which yields much food, and all desire its bounty.
hand, may she follow me there; neither Nirriti (destruction), nor Arâti (grudge), shall gain mastery over us!
When the pure treasure unto thee they offered, the milk shed from the cow who streameth nectar.
4. May (Rudra), the lord of beings, and Indra. drive forth from here the Sadânvâs; those that am seated on the
Streams of the bright have flowed to thee here at the seat of holy Law.
6 Ye, Indra, Vayu, well deserve to drink the juices pressed by us.
for earth; to the quarters are (to be offered) two mares; two heifers are for earth; two females are for the
Arka has its name. He offers with a leaf of the Arka, to unite it with its birthplace. He offers standing
these (bricks). By the fire the gods went to the world of heaven; they became yonder Krttikas; he for
i Thou art the bolt of Indra [2] slaying foes; with thee may he slay his foe.
b Thou art taken with a support; to the god Savity thee
18 Wherewith, Angirases! ye triumphed in your heart, and onward went to liberate the flood of milk;
puts down, thereby he wins the brilliance that is in the serpent; in that he utters a Yajus, thereby is it
Bring all the Gods that they may give us riches, Sarasvati, the Maruts, Asvins, Waters.
7 So may our song that purifies, through wisdom reach in a moment him the Universal,
Aditya cup. The Aditya cup is drawn with the largest number of Rcs; therefore kine axe the most
4. These four goddesses, the directions of space, the consorts of the wind, the sun surveys. Thus from kshetriya,
O Soma, be thou gracious, driving off distress: thou goest, clothed in butter, to a robe of state.
18 My kine, O Radiant God, seek pasture where they will, my during wealth, Immortal One.
2 The chariot which thou mountest, fair of shape, O Usas light to move,Therewith, O Daughter of the Sky, aid men of noble fame today.
42 When days begin, the strong juice, lovely, golden-hued, is recognized by wisdom more and more
By the Yajya and the Anuvakya, I summon for thee, O offering.
9 With keen glance guard the sacrifice, O Agni: thou Sage, conduct it onward to the Vasus.
is connected with Agni; (verily it serves) to unite him with his birthplace. With a Yajus he yokes (the
fourteen nights, prosper in both worlds, in this and in yonder; by the Prsthas they prosper in yonder
the cup of curd for one who desires cattle; curd is strength, cattle are strength; verily by strength he wins
Accordant, as the eye guides him who walks, have ye led our devotion onward by an easy path.
Prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullock, and pour for thee the fifteen-fold strong juices.
8 King Soma, favour us and make us prosper: we are thy devotees; of this be mindful.
Well pleased he longs for what your hands have tended: offer the gladdening Soma juice to Indra.
thereby his foes; in that (he offers) to Indra, the powerful, he bestows thereby power upon himself; he
r From the mouth to thee, O Visnu, do I utter the Vasat call;
21 One morn ye strengthened Vaga for the battle, to gather spoils that might be told in thousands.
9 Drink, Indra, with thy Marut Friends, pressed Soma at the morning rites,
1. WHAT laud, O Indra-Varuna, with oblation, hath like the Immortal Priest obtained your favour?
Soon as they see the furious combat raging, men speak forth praises of my vigorous horses.
year he wins food for him [2]; there are vessels used; in a vessel is food eaten; verily he wins food with
11. Thine is this broad, treasure-holding receptacle within which all worlds are contained. Do thou spare us, O lord
5 The men have decked him both at eve and morning, Most Youthful Agni, as they tend a courser.
2 Ye freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him newly-born to earth.
nights, go to the world of heaven. (The rite) of six nights is a Sattra of the gods, for these Prsthas are
of gravel) for one who desires cattle [2]; there are seven breaths in the head, cattle are the breaths; verily
3. Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food irb heaven,
Whose sacrifice, O Gods, ye visit and enjoy: ne'er doth the crafty guile of mortal injure him.
7. If he has been injured by falling into a pit, or if a stone was cast and hurt him, may he (Dhâtar, the fashioner) fit
to N. N.', he should say who has a son born [5]; verily he bestows upon him brilliance and splendour. He
potsherds, to the All-gods a cake on twelve potsherds. The early pressing belongs to Agni with the
3 Dear Narasamsa, sweet of tongue, the giver of oblations, I
f May the moving one who strikes at morning delight us;
in order. 'Attack, the twentyfold', (with these words he puts down) on the south; Attack is food, the
27 O Bride! May happiness attend you in your new home. May love increase as you bear children.
Determination is not found exclusively in yogis. Worldly-minded people are also staunchly determined in their pursuits. However, their determination is fanned by their desire to delight in the fruits of their efforts. They are focused on enjoying sensual pleasures, acquiring wealth, etc. And since money is the means for acquiring these, such people cling to money for their very life. Shree Krishna says that determination fuelled by the desire for enjoying rewards is in the mode of passion.
Thou hast disclosed the light to light the Arya: on thy left hand, O Indra, sank the Dasyu.
black, brown and red soils that sustain us, do I walk under the protection of the Lord, unslain, unwounded,
He streams erect to sacrifice, as 'twere with splendour, seeking kine.
4 Bring the Gods, Agni; in the three appointed places set them down:
14 What time thou settest near the Sun thy body, thy form, Immortal One, is seen expanding:
1. This vigorous one whom deities commission, the conqueror of cars, the strong and mighty,
birth to the cool night and foaming waters of the sea.
16 The robe they spread upon the Horse to clothe him, the upper covering and the golden trappings,
6 Born from the stream, like press-stones are the Princes, for ever like the stones that crush in pieces;
anointed, with dishevelled hair, howling, when a man has been slain, has been pierced by thee, O Arbudi!
13. The earth upon which they (the priests) inclose the altar (vedi), upon which they, devoted to all (holy) works,
He in Vivasvan's dwelling findeth his delight: praise thou the ever-conquering slayer of the foe.
1. WITH all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with full udders follow on thy path.
behind; one must take out carefully, (thinking) 'I have not taken out anything.' He who is left behind
forms the after-sacrifices with speckled butter, verily he bestows expiration and inspiration upon cattle.
is strength, the post is of the same height as the sacrificer; verily he unites the sacrificer with strength.
From what place have they come? With what intention? Sing they their strength through love of wealth,
1. ON that most wondrous car of yours, O Indra and Agni, which looks round on all things living,
4.5.5 Sukta 5 – Charm with the plant, Silaki (Laksha, Arundhati) for the cure of Wounds
1. COMMON to all mankind, auspicious Surya, he who beholdeth all, is mounting upward;
there is (an offering) on twelve potsherds, he bestows cattle upon him with the Jagati; he upon whose
2 And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward into strengthening food',
May she who prompts the wealthy, Lady of sweet strains, may Usas dawn our foes away.
4. Like cars that thunder on their way, like coursers eager for renown,
5 Whose lories when he glows in front of sacrite are fair to see,
Placing in every house your seven great treasures, bring blessing to our quadrupeds and bipeds.
7 When he had drunken draughts of this, Indra smote down resistless foes:
Him grasp, O thou Most Youthful, with thy fuel. to the Mati-seer's eye give him as booty.
3 This laud hath won the burden of the mountain. To aid the ancient birth of mighty waters
The year in unison with the Ayavans the dawn in unison with the
for concealment from Varuna. 'Thou art fuel may we prosper', he says; verily with the kindling-stick
1. I PRAISE with sacrifices mighty Heaven and Earth at festivals, the wise, the Strengtheners of Law.
The pressing-stones speak loud of Indra, while they shed the juice which, offered, honours him.
3. The asvattha-tree is the seat of the gods in the third heaven from here. There the gods procured the kushtha,
1.2.43 Mantra 43 – Kapinjala (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
body in the fire; the Yajya and the Anuvakya are in the Pañkti metre, man is fivefold, cattle are fivefold;
6. Through our desire of heroes, kine, and horses, potent Soma drops, brilliant and swift, have been effused.
10 Thou hast poured down the rain-flood now withhold it. Thou hast made desert places fit for travel.
All glories and all nourishment, Lords of all wealth! depend on you.
From this our gathering where we offer Soma. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
O Agni, in these homes shine forth, bright God! for our prosperity, shine, Purifier! splendidly.
18 O Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, pour on us accumulateds Plentiful, nutritious food,
4 That Indra may be bounteous, flow, most active Soma, for our weal:
His Friend art thou, yea, thou art his Protector whose joy it is to entertain thee duly.
sacrificer would be bereft of the world of heaven. He grasps hold (of it) by means of the omentum-forks;
is fivefold, cattle are fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice and cattle. He who piles for a second time
witchcraft should offer to Brahmanaspati (a cow) with brown ears; first he should make to Varuna an
21. Do not covet our cattle, our men, our goats and sheep! Bend thy course elsewhere, O strong god (ugra), slay
Kindled, his radiant might is made apparent, and the great God hath been set free from darkness.
8 Of wealth and homes of men thou art the ruler, and opener of the stable of the cattle.
u Gladly do thou, O god Soma, go to the dear place of Agni [2] with the Gayatri metre.
4 Indra and Varuna, ye hurl, O Mighty, on him your strongest flashing bolt of thunder
i Homage to him of the ditch, and to him of the lake.
The Son of Conquest, passing men and heroes, kine-winner, mount thy conquering car, O Indra.
2. That bone of thine which, injured and burst, exists in thy person, Dhâtar shall kindly knit together again, joint
Through many regions may our praise pass onward among mortal men.
3. From near and far away do thou, the everlasting, evermore
2 The strong Steers, gathering, have duly stirred themselves,and over the stream's wave the friends
He broke the never-broken ridge of Vala. With words of might Indra subdued the Panis.
Dharma consists of codes of conduct that are conducive to one’s purification and the general welfare of all living beings. Adharma consists of prohibited actions that lead to degradation and cause harm to society. The demoniac nature is devoid of faith in the knowledge and wisdom of the scriptures. Hence, those under its sway are confused about what is right and wrong action.A typical example of this is the present trend in western philosophy. Having evolved through various schools of thought after the Renaissance, such as Age of Enlightenment, Humanism, Empiricism, Communism, Existentialism, and Skepticism, the present era in western philosophy is labeled as “Post-modernism.” The prevalent view of Post-modernist thought is that there is no absolute truth. Multitudes have rejected the possibility that such a thing as absolute truth could exist. “All is relative” has become the slogan of the post-modernist era of philosophy. We often hear phrases like “that may be true for you, but it’s not true for me.” Truth is seen as a personal preference or perception that cannot extend beyond a person’s individual boundaries. This viewpoint has a big bearing on the subject of ethics, which deals with the question of right and wrong behavior. If there is no such thing as absolute truth, then there is no ultimate moral rightness or wrongness about anything. Then, people are justified in saying, “It may be right for you but that does not mean it is right for me.”Such an idea is very appealing to many, but if taken to its logical extreme it proves absurd and disastrous. For example, what if it is right for someone to ignore traffic lights, even when they are red? That person will put the life of others at risk by doing what he believes is right. What if it is considered right by someone to go on a suicide-bombing mission in a heavily populated civilian area amongst people he sees as enemies? He may be fully convinced that what he is doing is correct. But does that make it right in any sense of the word? If there is no such thing as absolute truth, then no-one can really say “he should do that” or “she shouldn’t do that.” All one can say is, “A lot of people do not feel good about this action.” According to the relativist viewpoint, one might respond, “That may be true for you, but it is certainly not true for us.” These can be the ruinous ethical consequences of disregarding the belief of an Absolute Truth.Shree Krishna states that the demoniac nature is confused about what is right and what is wrong, and thus, neither purity, nor truth, nor right conduct is found in them. In the following verse, he goes on to describe the predominant views of such people.
the pious: then as a pair ye shall rise from the cooked porridge!
7 Disporting, like a liberal chief, thou goest, Soma, to the sieve,
Be pleased to fulfill our dreams. Bestow your blessings upon us and on our animals.
11 Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, Rsis, imploring, have come nigh to Indra:
In his hand holding much that makes men happy, lulling to slumber and arousing creatures.
Agni, invested with his golden colours, before the thunder strike and lay you senseless!
10 Thy might, O Indra, at its birth, thee also, and thy mental power,
With hymns-for he illumines us-install him. He, Jatavedas, makes our rites successful.
5 These gifts of thine, O Food, O Food most sweet to taste,
Thence flows the imperishable flood and thence the universe hath life.
4 What, Varuna, hath been my chief transgression, ihat thou wouldst slay the friend who sings thy
taken (in the ladle) falls outside the enclosing-sticks, let that be the share of my brothers.' There fore
Adhvaryu. In giving her, he gives a thousand. A thousand he accepts who not knowing [2] accepts her.
Çaravas in size; the Rastrabhrts are pre-eminence, the mound is pre-eminence; verily by pre-eminence
verily he confers radiance upon himself. He, who piles (the fire) with faces on all sides, eats food in all
1.2.18 Mantra 18 – Indra (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
19 As ye heard Atri's earliest eulogy, so hear Syavasva, Soma-presser, ye who reel in joy.
c O fair one, clad in fair raiment in the world of heaven be ye two covered....
Morning and Night, the Two, as 'twere all-knowing: these bring the sacrifice unto the mortal.
2 Rouse us this day to high and happy fortune: to great felicity, O Dawn, promote us.
Once may he come unto us with his Steed, come unto us to win us strength, and to complete the
l I pour the libation over those which slay the Raksas, which slay the spell, and which are of Visnu.
Like Sun and Moon he took the stronghold's wealth away, and, praised in song, demolished foes with
f Thou art the strainer of the Vasus, of a hundred streams, thou art that of the Vasus, of a thousand
6 Here, Indra-Vayu, is the juice: drink it, accordant with the Gods,
O Dawn, at thine arising, and, the Sun's, may we attain the share allotted us!
5 May this our home be guarded well forward, ye Bounteous, on the way,
Let the spring flow, and when impetuous' they roar they inundate the earth with floods of pleasant
Now the Raksases infest the victim if it being offered to one deity is greater (than normal); 'Thou who
2. These Soma juices, skill.ed in song, purified, blent with milk and curd,
Pay worship with oblation, strong and passing wise. Drink thou the Soma, Indra, through the mighty
oppressor of Brahmans, the gods did assign to thee as thy share of water.
Scriptures are the guide maps given to humans on the journey toward enlightenment. They provide us with knowledge and understanding. They also give us instructions on what to do and what not to do. These instructions are of two kinds—vidhi and niṣhedh. The directives to perform certain activities are called vidhi. The directives not to perform certain activities are called niṣhedh. By faithfully following both these kinds of injunctions, human beings can proceed toward perfection. But the ways of the demoniac are the reverse of the teachings of the scriptures. They engage in prohibited acts and refrain from recommended ones. Referring to such people, Shree Krishna declares that those who renounce the authorized path and act according to their whims, impelled by the impulses of their desires, achieve neither true knowledge, nor the perfection of happiness, nor liberation from material bondage.
k The potsherds which wise men collect for the cauldron, these are in Pusan's guardianship. Lot Indra
Thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the Gods thou gavest room and freedom.
3 Four are his horns, three are the feet that bear him; his heads are two, his hands are seven in
reverences the Ahavaniya. Makha is the sacrifice [1]; verily he slays the sacrifice; verily paying homage
Thee claiming worship, bearing it to Gods -. there nigh to thee sate all the Holy Ones.
Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
He, sacrificing, fain for wealth, hath honoured the Gods vath those who sit and share oblations.
1. THE warrior's look is like a thunderous rain-cloud's, when, armed with mail, he seeks the lap of
before and after. Hospitality is the head of the sacrifice, the sacrificial cake is offered on nine potsherds,
my mark at so far I shall not miss.' The Adhvaryu taking the Agrayana, commencing the sacrifice, utters
To him who pours the juice give up the lawless man, the lawless who is wroth with us.
8 Lords of great wealth, manifold is your bounty: ye filled our cow with food that never faileth.
For thy new love and favour are we present: let us invoke thee, Indra, as our welfare.
7 Now have we, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great wishes forth to thee,
It is through the senses and their objects the world enters our mind. When we see, hear, touch, taste, or smell an object of perception, it leaves an impression on our mind. Our mind then dwells upon these experiences, starts to contemplate, and creates repetitive thoughts that increase our attachment to the world. Therefore, a practitioner of meditation should guard himself against the incessant stream of worldly thoughts that the unrestrained senses can create. Locking the world out by restraining the mind and the senses; is most essential in meditation.In this verse, Shree Krishna uses the words sarva-dvārāṇi-sanyamya, which mean guarding the gates of the body, and hṛidi nirudhyathat means “locking the mind in the heart.” He says that by controlling the passages that enter the body, one can lock the mind in the heart. Restricting the senses from their natural tendencies and directing the mind toward akṣharamthe imperishable Supreme Lord. Then with complete attention and devotional feelings, one should meditate on Him. He ends the verse with yoga-dhāraṇām,which means “uniting the consciousness with God.”
produces the east wind, to win the rains. He makes offering to the names of the wind; the wind rules the
Three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed their sweet streams around him with a murmur.
11 Indra alone filled full the earth and heaven, the Pair who meet together, rich in treasures.
stump; therefore many (shoots) spring up from the stump of trees. 'May we grow with a thousand
him he raised (the bolt) to hurl a second time; he said, 'Hurl it not at me; there is this strength in me, that
(And for which) the divine cask [1] has been forced out
the sacrificial cakes in each of the pressings; verily they win the deities who share in the pressing from
3 Invoked of many, Caster of the Stone my heart quakes like a rolling wheel for fear of penury.
6 For fertile fields, for worthy sons and grandsons, for the Sun's beauty and for steer-like vigour,
12 He thinker, knower both of earth and heaven, endowed with many a gift, bestowing thousands,
3. The choirs have established Indra King for ever for victory him, whose anger is resistless:
28 O Agni, made by strength! be thou born in the heavens or born in floods,
8 Discern thou well Aryas and Dasyus; punishing the lawless give them up to him whose grass is
51. This (naked skin) among the hides is born upon man (alone), all other animals are riot naked. Clothe
hundred (Krsnalas) in weight; man has a hundred (years) of life, a hundred powers; verily he finds
1. THE Godlike hero, famousest of nobles, hath granted me two oxen with a wagon.
Long may we live and have attendant progeny, have progeny with Soma's help.
When to the goal he comes, his journey ended, his Steeds he looses: this is Indra's doing.
2 Strong is the stone, the draught is strong, strong is this Soma that is pressed,
strew. The Adhvaryu turns away from the beast as it is slaughtered; verily he conceals himself from
year. The Divakirtya is the back, the Parahsamans the two sides; the Parahsamans are on both sides of
the vessel (full) of liquor, together with bowls of sour milk!
For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods.
1. THE drops of Soma juice like cows who yield their milk have flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the
E'en fain they gird us round and give rich gifts which ne'er are reft away, high-born! delightful with thy
9 Make splendid glory shine on us, thou Lord of strengthening food, God, as the Friend of Gods:
Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse with eloquence on the waters.
2. To thee (that growest) upon the mountain, the brooding-place of the eagle, (and) art sprung from Himavant,
11 Send forth our sacrifice with holy worship send forth the hymn and prayer for gain of riches.
2. Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra all deities who were thy friends forsook thee.
Agni, the open (mouth) Vaiçvanara [1], the belly the sea, the anus the atmosphere, the testicles the sky
6 The priests with ladles lifted up, worshipping here with holy thought,
Speed onward our oblations, God among the Gods, intelligent. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and
are four; verily with the metres (he places him); with an Atichandas as the last; the Atichandas is the
2. Fair is the juice beloved of Gods, washed in the waters, pressed by men:
2. Robed in fair raiment meet to wear in combat, a mighty Sage pronouncing invocations,
2 What hero hath been made his feast-companion? Who hath been partner in his loving-kindness?
The earth hath spread herself in all her fulness: the cloud that was about to move hath rested.
a Thought and thinking, intent and intention, known and knowledge, mind and power, the new and the
the light', (with these words he puts down) on the north; verily with these he supports hearing. 'This one
In the unlightened depth of darkness round them let niggard traffickers sleep unawakened.
He replied, 'They have given them [5] to me.' They have not the power to do that', he replied, (whatever
Begat the fire between two stones, the spoiler in warriors' battle, He, O men, is Indra.
17 For you let us whose grass is trimmed call Agni, Agni, restless God.
2.5.3.7 Mantra 7: The Nakasad and other Bricks of the Fifth Layer
What it hath drunk, what it hath eaten as fodder [1],
offspring,Upon its top they say the fig is luscious none gaineth it who knoweth not the Father.
Seeing Shree Krishna in his beautiful two-armed form reconfirmed and strengthened Arjun’s sentiment of sakhya bhāv. Thus, Arjun says he has regained his composure and is back to normal. Seeing Shree Krishna’s pastimes with the Pandavas, the celestial sage Narad had earlier told Arjun’s elder brother, King Yudhishthir: gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣhya liṅgam (Bhāgavatam 7.15.75)[v25] “Shree Krishna resides in your house and lives with you just like your brother.” Thus, Arjun was habituated to having the privilege of interacting with the Lord as a brother and friend.
And Indra, for the sake of Divodasa demolished Sambara's nine-and-ninety castles.
Indra, who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. By him instructed am I come, O Agni.
14. All the gods that eat the oblation offered with the call vashat are coming over. Receive this oblation graciously;
20 Bright were the flaming fires, the Sun gave forth his shine, and Soma, Indra's juice, shone clear.
with the horse sacrifice, and he who knows it thus. It was the left eye of Prajapati that swelled; therefore
2. Auspicious Ashvins – the True Reality! May my speech be as sweet as honey, so that I may convey your
Or from the Adhvaryu's purifying filter, I offer thee with heart and cry of Vasat!
2. As mighty food speed hitherward, Indu, as a most splendid steer:
6 They met in fight the army of the blameless. then the Navagvas put forth all their power.
5 May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, strongly urging, win me sons and offspring.
schemes, then did the Asvins, the physicians of the gods, with might sweep death from us, O Agni!
3. Be gracious, brilliant Godl to him who, rich in sacred gifts,would fain
2 By praise-songs of Angirases exalted, may!he Gods come to us with their protection.
16 Come now unto the common laud of thee and of thy faithful friend.
6 Thou for the sake of Vayya and Turviti didst stay the great stream, flowing, allsustaining:
4 Bring hither nourishment for us, ye Asvins Twain; sprinkle us with your whip that drops with honeydew.
22 Bound fast to,every tree the cow is lowing, and thence the man-consuming birds are flying,
Accordant Deities shall bless our worship and make our sacrifice's ensign lofty.
He gave Sudas wide room and space, and often hath granted wealth to him who brought oblations.
Agni, bring riches hither to our liberal chiefs, and speed the oflering of our gifts.
(earth), the Go the atmosphere, the Ayus yonder (sky); verily they find support in these worlds, and he
the gods. As the subjects of the gods are in harmony, so he brings the human subjects into harmony.' In
4 Thy spirit come to thee again for wisdom, energy, and lire,
Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, O Asvins, grant us vigorous strength.
7 Served with fair rites he flows, ensign of sacrifice: Soma advances to the special place of Gods.
Agni hath helped our friends, hath helped Medhyitithi, hath helped Upastuta to win.
verily they win brilliance. There is a Pañcadaça (Stoma); verily they win power. There is a Saptadaça
6 These Somas passing through the fleecy filter, like rain descending from the clouds of heaven,
The theologians consider, 'Should (a day) be left out, or should it not be left out?' They say, 'It should be
may the Adityas fashion thee with the Jagati metre in the manner of Angiras. Thou art the sky; may the
4 When, Indra, thou hadst slain the dragon's firstborn, and overcome the charms of the enchanters,
Be unto us a wide broad ample castle bless, prosper on their way our sons and offspring.
2. From heaven, from out the firmament hath PavamAna been effused
cattle, do thou make that good for me', be says in effect. 'O thou of various splendour, in safety may I
sacrifice. 'It was the twelve "calf-binders" which supported it', they say. Therefore with twelve those
With simple heart I have beheld him from anear: his Mother kisses him and he returns her kiss.
smites away the Raksases. He places the two kindling-sticks upright, for upwards they smite away the
'The strength on the stone', (with these words) he moistens (the fire), and so purifies it; verily also he
As this thy friend, our liberal patron, praises thee, do thou, Brhaspati, fulfil our hearts' desire.
He, Pavamana, granted strength to Indra: he, Indu, generated strength in Surya.
18 Come as the laws of Heaven ordain, Varuna, Mitra, void of guile:
5. I laud the Sage, who orders sacrifice, who hath great riches under his control.
Vaisvanara, conveyer of oblations, ensign of worship, have the Gods engendered.
This day, and after, gracious, worship thou our Gods, that we may have heroic sons.
So let the Brahman hear the praise we utter. This hath the four-horned Buffalo emitted.
not sacrifice; therefore the sacrificer is higher than the man who does not sacrifice. He fills up the
12 But Vrtra scared not Indra with his shaking or his thunder roar.
Let thy Bay Horses bring thee hither as the Sun, as every day they bring the Sun.
12 Indra broke through Ilibisa's strong castles, and Suspa with his horn he cut to pieces:
May harmony be established by removing what is dreadful. May harmony be established by removing what is
None born or springing into life comes nigh thee. Do what thou hast to do, exceeding mighty?
thou art the god purifier of gods; to those thee whose portion thou art!
6. Even the strong hand the bold player conquers, as the skilled gambler heaps up his winnings at the proper
1. O VAYU, drinker of the pure, be near us: a thousand teams are thine, Allbounteous Giver.
4. The leprosy which has originated in the bones, and that which has originated in the body and upon the skin, the
3 Best praiser of all these be he; foremost, our chiefs who sacrifice.
34. Ascend the heavens, ascend the earth sovereignty ascend thou, and possessions ascend thou! Offspring
1 NE'ER doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, bringeth his gift to the far-striding Visnu.
17 Awake the Asvins, Goddess Dawn! Up Mighty Lady of sweet strains!
11 This the fair name and this the lovely aspect of him the Waters' Son increase in secret.
5 What he hath longed for we have brought to Indra, who from the days of old hath done us service.
9 That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, the Waters. Tvastar, and with might, the
7 We have elected thee as most delightful for thy beams' glow: hear our great laud, O Agni.
30. An (amulet) auspicious for me thou shalt fasten upon (me), together with brahma (spiritual exaltation) and
that he puts down the water bricks, (it is) to avoid excessive burning. She said, 'He shall eat food with
from thee; may the twenty-onefold Stoma support thee on earth, the Niskevalya Uktha establish thee, in
24, 25. The Brahmakârin carries the shining brahma: into this all the gods are woven. Producing in-breathing and
9 With firm limbs, multiform, the strong, the tawny adorns himself with bright gold decorations:
When Indra's helpers fighting for the good of men, the Maruts, faithful to mankind, joyed in the light.
9. The missile of the gods shall pass thee by! I pass thee across the mist (of death); from death I have rescued
5 Grant, Agni, to the worshipper wealth rich in heroes, plenteous store,
2. Enter into the rays, into smoke, O sin; go into the vapours, and into the fog! Lose thyself on the foam of the
(Stoma), for support; verily also they place radiance in themselves. There is a Trinava (Stoma), for con
Many people are at the level of mechanical practice. They perform the rituals enjoined by their religious creed, but do not engage their mind in God. When they purchase a new house or a new car, they call the Pundit to perform the pūjā (worship) ceremony. And while the Pundit performs the pūjā, they sit and talk in the other room or sip a cup of tea. For them, devotion is nothing more than performing the empty ritual. It is often performed by way of ceremonial habits that have been passed on from parents and elders. Performing rituals mechanically is not a bad thing, for after all, something is better than nothing. At least such people are externally engaging in devotion.However, Shree Krishna says that higher than mechanical practice is the cultivation of spiritual knowledge. Knowledge bestows the understanding that the goal of life is God-realization and not material progress. One who is versed in knowledge goes beyond the empty rituals and develops the desire to purify the mind. But mere knowledge by itself cannot cleanse the heart. And thus, Shree Krishna says that higher than the cultivation of knowledge is the process of engaging the mind in meditation. By practically controlling the mind through meditation, we begin to develop detachment from worldly pleasures. When the mind develops some measure of the quality of detachment, we can then practice the next step, which is renunciation of the fruits of actions. As explained in the previous verse, this will help remove worldliness from the mind and strengthen the intellect for the subsequent higher stages.
ours has here been deposited: the cooked (porridge) shall come back again to him that cooks it!
sacrificer', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. He sacrifices to Soma; verily he places seed; he
7. Win to protect you, Rudra, lord of worship, priest of both worlds, effectual sacrificer,
8 When, Mighty Lord of Heroes, thou didst cat a thousand buffaloes,
7 Indra, unconquered might is thine, Thunderer, Caster of the Stone;
Breathed on by Vivasvant, do thou be gracious to us [4];
sacrifices with an abundant offering and is multiplied with offspring, with cattle, with pairings.
5. With wealth to our libation come, be not thou angry with us, like
12 When will the son be born and seek his father? Mourner-like, will he weep when first he knows him?
strong', he says; he obtains a thousand cattle. In his offspring a strong one is born who knows thus.
Out of Destruction's lap again I bring him, save him for life to last a hundred autumns.
12 Whether with Indra ye be faring, Asvins, or resting in one dwelling-place with Vayu,
the quarters, the ribs the intermediate quarters, the winking the day and night, the joints the half-months,
5 Hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, oven of old, from men.
them. The gods said, 'The cattle on which we have lived have followed us.' They arranged this (rite) of
Dharma is verily the prescribed actions that are conducive to our spiritual growth and progress; the reverse of this is adharma (unrighteousness). When unrighteousness prevails, the creator and administrator of the world intervenes by descending and reestablishing dharma. Such a descension of God is called an Avatār. The word “Avatar” has been adopted from Sanskrit into English and is commonly used for people’s images on the media screen. In this text, we will be using it in its original Sanskrit connotation, to refer to the divine descension of God. Twenty four such descensions have been listed in the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam. However, the Vedic scriptures state that there are innumerable descensions of God:janma-karmābhidhānāni santi me ’ṅga sahasraśhaḥna śhakyante ’nusaṅkhyātum anantatvān mayāpi hi(Bhāgavatam 10.51.37)[v5]“Nobody can count the infinite Avatars of God since the beginning of eternity.” These Avatars are classified in four categories, as stated below:1. Āveśhāvatār—when God manifests his special powers in an individual soul and acts through him. The sage Narad is an example of Āveśhāvatār. The Buddha is also an example of Āveśhāvatār.2. Prābhavāvatār—these are the descensions of God in the personal form, where he displays some of his divine powers. Prābhavāvatārs are also of two kinds:a) Where God reveals himself only for a few moments, completes his work, and then departs. Hansavatar is an example of this, where God manifested before the Kumaras, answered their question, and left.b) Where the Avatar remains on the earth for many years. Ved Vyas, who wrote the eighteen Puranas and the Mahabharat, and divided the Vedas into four parts, is an example of such an Avatar.3. Vaibhavatār—when God descends in his divine form, and manifests more of his divine powers. Matsyavatar, Kurmavatar, Varahavatar are all examples of Vaibhavatārs.4. Parāvasthāvatār—when God manifests all his divine powers in his personal divine form. Shree Krishna, Shree Ram, and Nrisinghavatar are all Parāvasthāvatār.This classification does not imply that any one Avatār is bigger than the other. Ved Vyas, who is himself an Avatār, clearly states this: sarve pūrṇāḥ śhāśhvatāśhcha dehāstasya paramātmanaḥ (Padma Purāṇ)[v6] “All the descensions of God are replete with all divine powers; they are all perfect and complete.” Hence, we should not differentiate one Avatar as bigger and another as smaller. However, in each descension, God manifests his powers based on the objectives he wishes to accomplish during that particular descension. The remaining powers reside latently within the Avatar. Hence, the above classifications were created.
12. Honied are the roots of these herbs, honied their tops, honied their middles, honied their leaves, honied their
generation. The sacrificial fee is a pair of kine, for prosperity.
5. From the point (of the arrow) have I charmed away the poison, from the substance that has been smeared
14 Four coursers with a splendid car, Savistha's horses, fleet of foot,
8. O Indra, turn us not away: be present with us at our feast
37 Singer of true songs, ever-watchful, Soma hath settled in the ladles when they cleanse him.
12 His portion is exceeding great like a victorious soldier's spoil.
the libation (as a whole) is the ninth; verily he extends the threefold (Stoma) at the beginning of the
place of sacrifice. He conquers (apnoti) his foe, his foe conquers him not. On a place of sacrifice which
3 From hills and heaven ye shake wealth for the worshipper: in terror at your coming low the woods
Then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who have blamed my joyous Friend and scorned him.
4 This Agni, Lord of wealth and spoil hundredfold, thousandfold, is head
5. Flow onward, dear to all mankind fi full the mighty heaven and earth,
Drink of the pleasant liquor of the Soma give riches to the people who adore you.
5. O mistress of dwelling, as a sheltering and kindly goddess thou wast erected by the gods in the bealrinina;
Let not the guileful wicked man be lord of us:-still may we prosper, singing goodly hymns of praise.
3 Do thou who art Protector of us thy friends who praise thee
Great is the Law of Varuna and Mitra. What, wanton! wilt thou say to men to tempt them?
3. Away we take the offensiveness that is in thy jaw, away (the offensiveness) in thy mouth, so that, bereft of will,
Enjoy, O Jatavedas, this our fuel, and bring the Gods to us to taste oblations.
He hastens o'er the fleece with all his thousand streams: men make him bright and beautiful.
5 Thou, Slaughterer of Vrtra, art Guardian and Friend of one and two,
race, he slays the foe, he conquers in the battle, and like Agni he is not to be overcome. He for whom
1 FOR the Celestial Race this song of praise which gives wealth lavishly
When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him had smitten Vrtra he deserved the choice of Gods.
Udumbara is strength; verily he unites strength with strength. (The post) is of Udumbara wood of the
Maitravaruna, a bull to the Brahmanacchansin, garments to the Nestr and Potr, a wagon drawn by one ox
f This is thy share, O Rudra, for which thou didst ask; rejoice in it, find (for us) the lordship of cows,
and may your life be filled with glory. May your husband see a hundred summers.
3. Immortal, from of old Priest among mortal men, whose tones are sweetest in the house!
as to be irrecoverable; in that he takes the steps of Visnu the sacrificer becoming Visnu wins these
We yearn to be thine own, Dealer of Wealth: may we be to this Mother like her sons.
Agni departed from the gods, desiring a portion; the gods said to him, 'come back to us, carry the
We know thee, Lord of Bay Steeds victor in the fight, vanquishing e'en the invincible.
us the power to speak what is noble, and what without speech would be hidden in secrecy.
food eaten. He pours down from the head, for from the head is food eaten; he causes (the water) to flow
buy', he says that is according to the text. The gods retook by force the gold where with they purchased
Shree Krishna declares in this verse that, whoever remembers Him at the time of death, attains Him and becomes God-like in character. He uses the wordsmad bhāvaṁ, which means “godlike nature.” Therefore, one can achieve the cherished goal of God-realization by consciously absorbing one’s mind in the transcendental Names, Forms, Virtues, Pastimes, and Abodes of God, even at the time of death.It is one’s state of consciousness and the object of their absorption at the time of death; that determines their next birth. Shree Krishna will explainthis principle in the next verse.
is consecrated is a foetus, the consecration-shed is the womb (in which he is). If the man who is
of the tree which fears the axe falls away with the first chip; the first chip which falls he should take up;
1. ONE is a youth brown, active, manifold he decks the golden one with ornament.
As he who finds a shade in fervent sunlight may I, uninjured, win the bliss of Rudra.
1. LIGHTLY your coursers travel through the regions when round thesea of air your car is flying.
4 When thrice the men lead round the Steed, in order, who goeth to the Gods as meet oblation,
beaker. If he were to call without holding the Vayu cup or the beaker, he would lose his own; therefore
the middle men enjoy strength. So large is it, commensurate with Prajapati, the mouth of the sacrifice.
6 Within the Waters-Soma thus hath told me-dwell all balms that heal,
3. Thy marrow shall unite with marrow, and thy joint (unite) with joint; the part of thy flesh that has fallen off, and
3. These things thou winnest quickly, while men cleanse thee, Soma, nobly rich!
Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with wealth for victory.
piled the fire becomes aheat [6]; 'Suck this mighty breast of the waters', (with these words) he offers a
7 Warring for Purukutsa thou, O Indra, Thunder-armed I breakest down the seven castles;
5 Rousing with draughts, the Shaker, rushing onward, impetuous, very strong, armed as with arrows
plants spring up in this (earth), his corn prospers. To Agni and Soma should he offer it who desires,
brilliance, of the deities, of power. If he desire of a man, 'May I unite him with brilliance, with the
4 When thus, O Rbhus, ye had done ye questioned thus, Whither went he who came to us a
invoke bringing light for N. N.', he should say who has a son born; verily he confers upon him brilliance
Why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of eapth and heaven?
5. As the Ichneumon tears the serpent, and joins him together again, thus, O potent (plant), join together what
When, singing with devotion, he invokes you. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
2 Asvins, ye gained that glory by your Godhead, ye Sons of Heaven, by your own might and power.
7 Be this our praise, O Varuna and Mitra may this be health and force to us, O Agni.
12 Thou, Indra, art the mark whereon the eyes of all life rest, when thou,
says; verily from him he repels death. 'We from the darkness', he says; the darkness is the evil one;
1. I MOVE before thee here present in person, and all the Deities follow behind me.
May he, implored, fulfil the prayer for plenty of him who worships, of the living mortal.
1. MAY Surya guard us out of heaven, and Vata from the firmament,
would hand himself over to Nirrti; therefore it should not be stepped on. He puts down the human head,
1. BORN in the heavens the Dawn hath flushed, and showing her majesty is come as Law ordaineth.
8 Hear, too, the prayer of this thy present beadsman, O Indra, Hero, cherishing the singer.
10 Indra, Brhaspati, rainers of treasure, rejoicing at this sacrifice drink the Soma.
Viraj. For fifteen nights should he be consecrated; the nights of the half-month are fifteen; the year is
If Arjun chose to flee from battle, not only would Arjun’s estimation wane in the assembly of mighty warriors, but he would also be disparaged. Shree Krishna uses the word nindataḥ which means “to vilify.” Avāchya vādān means the use of harsh words such as “Eunuch.” Arjun’s enemies, like Duryodhan, would say many unbecoming things about him, such as, “Look at that impotent Arjun fleeing from the battlefield like a dog with its tail between its legs.” Shree Krishna reminds Arjun that such derision would be very painful to him.
it, it ran upwards. He cast the man at it. In that he puts down the heads of animals, he piles it [1],
Nor these the waters that flow on for ever, nor hills, abaters of the wind's wild fury.
To both most wonted places of assembly he travels and returns with perfect knowledge.
1. DRINK, Indra, Marut-girt, as Bull, the Soma, for joy, for rapture even as thou listest.
4. The black (plant) that produces even colour has been fetched out of the earth. Do thou now, pray, perfect this,
Whereby the holy ones created for the God the light divine that ever wakes.
6 May he who to the offerer gives the foeman's man-sustaining food,
Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord of kine
'We have come to the heaven: to the heaven we have come', he says; verily he goes to the world of
(sky). In that he recites sitting, therefore the gods live on that which is given hence; in that he responds
b Thou art blowing after; for night thee! Quicken night. Thou art eager [1]; for the Vasus thee! Quicken
3. Dearest to Gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with thy stream,
29. Scatter the spelt into Agni Gâtavedas (the fire), sweep away to a far distance the chaff! This (chaff) we have
17 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in this fight where spoil is gathered,
Swelling the roar in the far distant limits, they have spread wide the blast sent forth by Indra.
7 Agni, accept with joy, be glad in this our prayer, joy-giver, self-sustained, strong, born of Holy Law!
1. Swift as the wind be thou, O steed, when joined (to the chariot); at Indra's urging go, fleet as the mind! The
With four-and-thirty lights he looks around him, lights of one colour though their ways are divers.
15 May this your praise, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by the poet, Mana's son, Mandarya,
b Raise aloft the sacrifice; in the sky guide to the gods the prayers.
21 Soft be our path for ever, well-provisioned: with pleasant meath, O Gods, the herbs besprinkle.
who is the support of the Sun, the Moon, the fire and the wind?
e Homage to him of the sharp arrow, and to him of the weapon.
Drink, heavenly-natured. at our sacrifices, and give us bounties for the hymns we sing you.
5 As drivers of the car avoid ill roads, let sorrows pass us by.
tenth day has a Sodaçin; verily they place strength in the bolt. There axe twelve Saptadaças, to win food;
out with holy power and with the deities. 'Breaking not, O earth, fill the regions, the quarters' [3], he
The Hotr seated at the altar, the guest seated in the house,
skin; the black antelope skin is the sacrifice; verily he gathers the sacrifice with the sacrifice. If he were
Easy to find with thee are treasures of the Dawn for mortal man whom thou dost speed.
b May the cup be mine; may the Puroruc be mine;
after them follows the fair report, 'These sacrificers have succeeded', and therefore all succeed.
2 According to primeval plan this Soma, with his stream, effused
beings thee!' (with these words) he takes up the ladle; of the gods that are that is the share; verily he
2. Gods, may our ears hear that which is auspicious, may our eyes see that which is good, ye holy!
4.3.12 Sukta 12 – Prayer at the building of a House
25 Him like a bridegroom, him who stirs all people, like a noble horse,
They won the friendship of the Gods; the Sages carried away the fruit of their devotion.
6 Ye who have gathered up your gifts, celestial and terrestrial food,
13 Come hither from the mountains, come from regions of the sea of air.
29. Slaughter of an innocent is heinous, O spell: do not slay our cow, horse, or serving-man! Wherever thou hast
10. O sun, take away their sight; O rays, run after them; clinging to their feet, fasten yourselves upon them, when
8 And, taking thy delight with us bring us still undiminished food:
5 Praiseworthy, givers of good gifts, Heroes with full and perfect strength To Maruts, Holy Ones of heaven, will I extol the sacrifice.
he says. By that (the Rc) is connected with the All-gods. 'Let him choose glory that he may prosper', he
Birds of red hue were round about and burning splendours compassed you.
Drink of the meath we offer, and delight thee with food that cometh from the mountain ridges.
procreation, plough, harrow, holy order, immortality, freeness from disease, freedom from illness, life,
propagated', he saw this (fire) in the pan, he bore it for a year, then was he propagated. Therefore for a
The hymn of praise extols Indra the far-renowned: him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
Rajanya is connected with the Tristubh. To Çamyu, son of Brhaspati, the sacrifice did not resort; it
7 So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou Mitra, Varuna, and Indra.
brave Lord, like one in mail; yea, burst it, O brave Lord, like one in mail!
10 What time, ye Lords of ample wealth, the Lady mounted on your car,
With each (finger) separately [4] he measures; verily he measures it with each fresh in turn; therefore the
7 Doers of marvels, skilful workers, ye restored Vandana, like a car, worn out with length of days.
Then straight the mountains clothe them in the rain-cloud: the Heroes, putting forth their vigour, loose
e O sun, blazing, be thou blazing among the gods; make me blazing, of long life, radiant among men; for
The men, the pressing-stones, the cows, the waters have made this Soma ready for thy drinking.
On Vimada thou hast bestowed both food and wealth, making thy bolt dance in the sacrificer's fight.
an ell; therefore birds have strength by their wings. The wings and the tail are a fathom in breadth; so
Convey this sacrifice to Gods in heaven. Ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.
them glory came, he went to the hill, Agni followed him; Agni and Soma, those two, united; Indra,
4.6.131Sukta 131 – Charm to arouse the passionate love of a Man
20 The Maruts' high protecting aid, the Asvins, and the God who saves,
support of it is the beaker, (the support) of the Stoma is Soma, (the support) of the hymns is the Stoma.
Knowledge is appealing to the intellect when it is expressed with precision and clarity, and is substantiated with sound logic. Further, for it to be accepted as infallible, it must be confirmed on the basis of infallible authority. The reference for validating spiritual knowledge is the Vedas.Vedas: These are not just the name of some books; they are the eternal knowledge of God. Whenever God creates the world, He manifests the Vedas for the benefit of the souls. The Bṛihadāraṇyak Upaniṣhad (4.5.11) states: niḥśhvasitamasya vedāḥ “The Vedas manifested from the breath of God.” They were first revealed in the heart of the first-born Brahma. From there, they came down through the oral tradition, and hence, another name for them is Śhruti, or “knowledge received through the ear.” At the beginning of the age of Kali, Ved Vyas, who was himself a descension of God, put down the Vedas in the form of a book, and divided the one body of knowledge into four portions—Ṛig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda, and Atharva Veda. Hence, he got the name Ved Vyās, or “one who divided the Vedas.” The distinction must be borne in mind that Ved Vyas is never referred to as the composer of the Vedas but merely the one who divided them. Hence, the Vedas are also called apauruṣheya, which means “not created by any person.” They are respected as the infallible authority for spiritual knowledge.bhūtaṁ bhavyaṁ bhaviṣhyaṁ cha sarvaṁ vedāt prasidhyati (Manu Smṛiti 12.97)“Any spiritual principle must be validated on the authority of the Vedas.” To elaborate this knowledge of the Vedas, many sages wrote texts and these traditionally became included in the gamut of the Vedic scriptures because they conform to the authority of the Vedas. Some of the important Vedic scriptures are listed below.Itihās: These are historical texts, and are two in number, the Ramayan and the Mahabharat. They describe the history related to two important descensions of God. The Ramayan was written by Sage Valmiki, and describes the Leelas, or divine Pastimes, of Lord Ram. Amazingly, it was written by Valmiki before Shree Ram actually displayed His Leelas. The great poet Sage was empowered with divine vision, by which he could see the Pastimes Lord Ram would enact on descending in the world. He thus put them down in 24,000 most beautifully composed Sanskrit verses of the Ramayan. These verses also contain lessons on ideal behavior in various social roles, such as son, brother, wife, king, and married couples. The Ramayan has also been written in many regional languages of India, thereby increasing its popularity amongst the people. The most famous amongst these is the Hindi Ramayan, Ramcharit Manas, written by a great devotee of Lord Ram, Saint Tulsidas.The Mahabharat was written by Sage Ved Vyas. It contains 100,000 verses and is considered the longest poem in the world. The divine Leelas of Lord Krishna are the central theme of the Mahabharat. It is full of wisdom and guidance related to duties in all stages of human life, and devotion to God. The Bhagavad Gita is a portion of the Mahabharat. It is the most popular Hindu scripture, since it contains the essence of spiritual knowledge, so beautifully described by Lord Krishna Himself. It has been translated in many different languages of the world. Innumerable commentaries have been written on the Bhagavad Gita.Puranas: There are eighteen Puranas, written by Sage Ved Vyas. Together, they contain 400,000 verses. These describe the divine Pastimes of the various forms of God and His devotees. The Puranas are also full of philosophic knowledge. They discuss the creation of the universe, its annihilation and recreation, the history of humankind, the genealogy of the celestial gods and the holy sages. The most important amongst them is the Bhāgavat Purāṇ, or the Shreemad Bhagavatam. It was the last scripture written by Sage Ved Vyas. In it, he mentions that in this scripture, he is going to reveal the highest dharma of pure selfless love for God. Philosophically, the Shreemad Bhagavatam begins where the Bhagavad Gita ends.Ṣhaḍ-darśhan: These come next in importance amongst the Vedic scriptures. Six sages wrote six scriptures highlighting particular aspects of Hindu philosophy. These became known as the Ṣhaḍ-darśhan, or six philosophic works. They are:1. Mīmānsā: Written by Maharishi (Sage) Jaimini, it describes ritualistic duties and ceremonies.2. Vedānt Darśhan: Written by Maharishi Ved Vyas, it discusses the nature of the Absolute Truth.3. Nyāya Darśhan: Written by Maharishi Gautam, it develops a system of logic for understanding life and the Absolute Truth.4. Vaiśheṣhik Darśhan: Written by Maharishi Kanad, it analyses cosmology and creation from the perspective of its various elements.5. Yog Darśhan: Written by Maharishi Patañjali, it describes an eightfold path to union with God, beginning with physical postures.6. Sānkhya Darśhan: Written by Maharishi Kapil, it describes the evolution of the Universe from prakṛiti, the primordial form of the material energy.Apart from these mentioned above, there are hundreds of other scriptures in the Hindu tradition. It would be impossible to describe them all here. Let it suffice to say that the Vedic scriptures are a vast treasure house of divine knowledge revealed by God and the saints for the eternal welfare of all humankind.Amongst these scriptural texts, the Brahma Sūtra (Vedānt Darśhan) is considered as the last word on the topic of the distinction between the soul, the material body, and God. Hence, Shree Krishna particularly mentions it in the above verse. “Ved” refers to the Vedas, and “ant” means “the conclusion.” Consequently, “Vedānt” means “the conclusion of Vedic knowledge.” Although, the Vedānt Darśhan was written by Sage Ved Vyas, many great scholars accepted it as the reference authority for philosophical dissertation and wrote commentaries on it to establish their unique philosophic viewpoint regarding the soul and God. Jagadguru Shankaracharya’s commentary on the Vedānt Darśhan is called Śhārīrak Bhāṣhya, which lays the foundation for the advait-vād tradition of philosophy. Many of his followers, such as Vachaspati and Padmapada have elaborated upon his commentary. Jagadguru Nimbarkarcharya wrote the Vedānt Pārijāta Saurabh, which explains the dwait-advait-vād school of thought. Jagadguru Ramanujacharya’s commentary is called Śhrī Bhāṣhya, which lays the basis for the viśhiṣhṭ-advait-vād system of philosophy. Jagadguru Madhvacharya’s commentary is called Brahma Sūtra Bhāṣhyam, which is the foundation for the dwait-vād school of thought. Mahaprabhu Vallabhacharya wrote Aṇu Bhāṣhya, in which he established the śhuddhadvait-vād system of philosophy. Apart from these, some of the other well-known commentators have been Bhat Bhaskar, Yadav Prakash, Keshav, Nilakanth, Vijnanabhikshu, and Baladev Vidyabhushan.Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, himself a Vedic scholar par excellence, did not write any commentary on the Vedānt Darśhan. He took the view that the writer of the Vedānt, Sage Ved Vyas himself, declared that his final scripture the Shreemad Bhagavatam is its perfect commentary:arthoyaṁ brahmasūtrāṇaṁ sarvopaniṣhadāmapi“The Shreemad Bhagavatam reveals the meaning and the essence of the Vedānt Darśhan and all the Upanishads.” Hence, out of respect for Ved Vyas, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not deem it fit to write another commentary on the scripture.
6 To him the Maruts' Father is this hymn addressed, to strengthen Rudra's might, a song more sweet
seven feet.' 'What by the eighth?' 'The Gayatri with its eight syllables.' 'What by the ninth?' 'The Trivrt
4 Accept our sacrifice for weal, sharers of praise! the Soma shed:
4 Come, seat thee on this bed of grass, O Yama, in company with Angirases and Fathers.
2. With the shell which was born in the sea, at the head of bright substances, we slay the Rakshas and conquer
9 His yellow-coloured jaws, like ladles move apart, what time, for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted
(him) they pierce, he lives; whomsoever of the foe, he dies; he wins that battle [4]. He loves to frequent
he unites it with all the gods, the Soma is cattle; (with the words) 'For expiration thee', he ties it; verily
Then both the heaven and earth trembled in terror at the strong Hero's thunder when he bellowed.
16 The Bhrgus are like Suns, like Kanvas, and have gained all that their thoughts were bent upon.
Ne'er do they slumber, never close their eyelids, faithful, far-ruling for the righteous mortal.
2 When, Bright Ones, fain to show your might ye have determined on your course,
Agni who hath secured the Gods' high favour,-may he be gracious, to us Jatavedas.
For even Mitra mid the Gods is angry there are both song and strength for those who come not.
4 Shared by all Gods, Infallible, the Leader of our holy hymns,
c Depart not from the life-giving Rc, from the Saman which protecteth the body.
Persons who seek worldly gain worship the celestial gods and seek boons from them. The boons the celestial gods bestow are material and temporary, and they are given only by virtue of the power they have received from the Supreme Lord. There is a beautiful instructive story in this regard:Saint Farid went to the court of Emperor Akbar, a powerful king in Indian history. He waited in the court for an audience, while Akbar was praying in the next room. Farid peeped into the room to see what was going on, and was amused to hear Akbar praying to God for more powerful army, a bigger treasure chest, and success in battle. Without disturbing the king, Farid returned to the royal court.After completing his prayers, Akbar came and gave him audience. He asked the great Sage if there was anything that he wanted. Farid replied, “I came to ask the Emperor for things I required for my āśhram. However, I find that the Emperor is himself a beggar before the Lord. Then why should I ask him for any favors, and not directly from the Lord himself?”The celestial gods give boons only by the powers bestowed upon them by the Supreme Lord. People with small understanding approach them, but those who are intelligent realize that there is no point in going to the intermediary and they approach the Supreme Lord for the fulfillment of their aspirations. People are of various kinds, possessing higher and lower aspirations. Shree Krishna now mentions four categories of qualities and works.
Heart-stirring, longed for, succourers of Vispala, here are Heaven's Sons whose sway blesses the
9 Reliever is your mother's name, and hence Restorers are ye called.
3 He, like the Unborn, holds the broad earth up; and with effective utterance fixed the sky.
twenty-four syllables [2], splendour is connected with the Gayatri; verily in the Gayatri and in splendour
expiration, inspiration, out-breathing, and food, and reach their full life, who knowing thus perform (the
becoming gentle, well resting, auspicious, comes to him, and harms him not. The theologians say, 'Does
Giving us riches famed to distant places. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
3 May we adore thee in thy loftiest birthplace, and, with our praises, in thy lower station.
5 Like the Dawn's lover, spreading light, well-known as hued like morn, may he remember me.
O Agni, find thou grace for us with Varuna, with Maruts who illumine all.
11. He that has undertaken it has not been able to accomplish it: he broke his foot, his toe. He, luckless,
argue; we may have knowingly committed sin; or we may have unknowingly performed evil deeds. We
9 Dadhyac of old, Anigiras, Priyamedha these, and Kanva, Atri, Manu knew my birth, yea, tbose of
4 Compassing those who bore away Dabhiti, in kindled fire he burnt up all their weapons.
Karm yogis continue to discharge their worldly duties while internally practicing detachment. Hence, they accept both positive and negative outcomes with equanimity, as the grace of God. The Lord has designed this world so beautifully that it makes us experience both happiness and distress for our gradual elevation. If we continue to lead our regular lives and tolerate whatever comes our way, while happily doing our duty, the world naturally pushes us toward gradual spiritual elevation.There is a sweet story that illustrates this concept. There was once a piece of wood. It went to a sculptor and said, “Can you please make me beautiful?” The sculptor said, “I am ready to do that. But are you ready for it?” The wood replied, “Yes, I am also ready.” The sculptor took out his tools and began hammering and chiseling. The wood screamed, “What are you doing? Please stop! This is so painful.” The sculptor replied wisely, “If you wish to become beautiful, you will have to bear the pain.” “All right,” said the wood, “Go ahead and do it. But please be gentle and considerate.” The sculptor continued his work again. The wood kept screaming, “Enough for today; I can’t bear it any further. Please do it tomorrow.” The sculptor was undeterred in his task, and in a few days, the wood was transformed into a beautiful deity, fit to sit on the altar of the temple.In the same way, our hearts are rough and unfinished because of endless lifetimes of attachment in the world. If we wish to become internally beautiful, we must be willing to tolerate pain and let the world do its job of purifying us. So karm yogis work with devotion, are equipoised in the results, and practice attaching their mind to God.
Down to the earth hath looked the heavenly Falcon: Soma with wisdom views all living creatures.
and the full moon night that the gods are sacrificed to; for they are the appointers of portions for the
2. As many enemies as ye are, lookina out auainst me, as I come on--of those that hate me do I take away the
When lauded for thyself, thou gavest freedom to sore-afflicted Heaven and to the people.
This Agni who hath brooked that men should seize him hath shone for man with glow insufferable.
Whom bards incite where heroes win the booty, or in the way to waters, He is Indra.
Come with your mighty powers, O ye Nasatyas; come hither, drink ye this the third libation.
organ he pours seed, for Agni is the generative organ. Then he burns at the end the plants; they then
'Him'; verily he makes the Saman. He makes the noise 'Him'; where the gods rested, there he sets them
5 Whoso, divine Sarasvati, invokes thee where the prize is set,
not to say that text, the cow with which the Soma is bought would go away. 'May Rudra guide thee
1 WAKEN the Asvin Pair who yoke their car at early morn: may they
the gods', he says, for he surrounds the gods. If he were to say, 'Bring hither the gods to the pious
8 As a wild elephant rushes on this way and that way, mad with heat,'
Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splendour-the Two unweariedly maintain their brightness.
Show forth that power that shall deserve the hymn of praise: destroy the evil speakers, O Brhaspati.
9 Thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, thy forceful shares of holy presents.
therefore the worse follows after the better. Many are the foes of the man who waxes great, he waxes
he lives. He who desires offspring should offer to Soma a brown (beast), and to Agni one with a black
What thou wilt do in bravery, Thunder-wielder! none is there who may hinder this thy prowess.
worshipAdding a beauty to the perfect Agni, and the God's beauteous eye that shines for ever.
the Adhvaryu would perish from suppression of urine; therefore it must be unloosed.
power in accord. There is (an offering) to Vaiçvanara on twelve potsherds; the year has twelve months,
For ye have ever in the Kanvas' well-loved house, O Asvins, drunk the Soma juice.
Having together swiftly borne my praises to the Gods, return. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
the food of the village, honey of the wild; in that he fills (it) with curds mixed with honey, (it serves) to
6 Holding his station firmly in the houses, Trita sat down within his home surrounded
n Be ye of one mind for us, one dwelling, spotless.
8 So let your coursers, ornaments of sacrifice, bring you to our libations here.
and evil men proceed, this road, free from enemies, and free from thieves, may we gain: with what is auspicious
3 Where are your newest favours shown? Where, Maruts, your prosperity?
'For food thee!' (with these words) he takes up the strew, for he who sacrifices strives (icháte) as it were.
of the Vairaja, verily he wins the brilliance of the creator; in that (he offers) to Indra of the Çakvara,
Blameless and active, hear this speech of orderers, this speech of us like orderers.
From thee comes wealth, sent by the Gods, bliss-giving; Agni, from thee the fleet impetuous charger.
man; verily they follow the breaths. There are four Sadahas, they make up twenty-four days. The year
7 The Stones press out the Soma, swift as car-borne men, and, eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap
to Varuna he frees him from the noose of Varuna; by Dadhikravan he purifies him. The sacrificial fee is
the full moon (sacrifices) Sacrifices with Soma, rests in the chosen resting-place of the gods which is
In the previous verses, Shree Krishna spoke about the different worlds and categories of souls. Now he speaks of God - the Supreme Divine Personality called the Paramātma, which means the Supreme Soul. The appellation of Param emphasizes on the fact that Paramātmā is different from ātmā, which is an individual soul, whereas, Paramātmā is the Supreme Soul. He is the transcendental God who controls both the perishable and imperishable worlds. For the non-dualistic philosophers who propagate that individual soul itself is the Supreme Soul, this verse is clear disapproval of their claim.While the individual soul is very tiny and confined to the material body it resides in; the Supreme Soul is present inside every living entity. He is the constant companion of the individual soul in every life, immaterial of what species the soul gets born into. He sits in their hearts quietly taking a note; keeping an account of their karmas, and gives appropriate results. For example, in a particular birth, a soul has received a dog’s body. The Supreme Soul continues to be inside and gives results based on the soul’s past karmas. This explains why even dogs have different destinies. Some dogs are born on the streets, live a famished life, and die in misery. Whereas, some get to live comfortably as pets in lavish mansions, living a dainty life. This huge difference in destiny is due to the stockpile of karmas from their previous births. The Supreme Soul which accompanies the soul in its various births, in different species, keeps granting results based on its karmas.The Supreme Soul also exists in a personal form as the four-armed Kshirodakshayi Vishnu, commonly known as “Bhagwan Vishnu”. A popular saying in Hindi goes: “mārane vāle ke do hāth, bachāne vāle ke chār hāth” which means, a killer has two arms, but the savior has four arms. The four-armed personality referred to here is the Paramātmā, the Supreme Soul.
To where the singer's Bull, the night's dispeller, after his proper law hath waxen stronger.
become blind, and the Raksases would destroy the sacrifice. He offers after putting down the gold;
The mighty calls on Bhaga for protection, on Bhaga calls the weak to give him riches.
Mighty through Law, Adityas, is your greatness; fair is it, Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra.
Pure, thou dost strike the Vritras dead, and strivest pure, to win the spoil.
6 Thou in thy strength surpassest Earth and Heaven: the regions comprehend not all thy greatness.
We implore you not to pass us by. We ask you to come to us and give us enlightenment.
12 From you, twain Maghavans, all truth proceedeth: even the waters break not your commandment.
Agrayana libation, he should draw off silently; those after with noise; verily he bestows upon the gods
10 Your dear names, conquering Maruts, we invoke, calling aloud till we are satisfied.
5 Yea, Pusan, Visnu, ye who run your course, enrich our hymns with kine;
eight potsherds to Agni, the all-knower; verily he has recourse to Agni, the all-knower, with his own
O Vasu, for all wealth that cometh of the kine, sharpen our powers, fair-visored God.
5. This God, while flowing, is adorned, gold-coloured, for the spoil, by men
For gain of strength that ever grows: for great is he.
19. I have delivered thee from death. The (powers) that furnish strength shall breathe upon thee. The (mourning
porridge, that has been presented and deposited by us, in three divisions has reached the thrte heavens.
14 Even as mother cows their calf, so let our praise-songs strengthen him,
goats; so many are the domesticated animals; verily by their characteristics he wins them [5]. He who
1. I LAUD with newest songs the Righteous People, Mitra and Varuna who make us happy.
3 Come hither, for the drops are here, O Lord of corn-lands. Lord of horses, Lord of kine:
Mix the oblations, then come hither with the meath, and drink the Soma, ye rich in abundant strength.
layers, six (sets of) mortar, they make up twelve, the year has twelve months; verily he finds support in
which they purchased in the right thigh of Indra; now the sacrificer is Indra; therefore he says thus. 'With
4 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters: the singen sought thy holy rite, O Indra.
Him, Agni Jatavedas, I beseech at dawn that he may bring the Gods to us.
That we may gain waters and seed and offspring, set thou our princes on thy side, O Indra.
12 With us are raining Rudras, clouds accordant in call to battle, at the death of Vrtra,
5 Dawns, who come forward with the bright beams of the Sun, and at your earliest flushing bring to us
Let not the Sun with fervent heat consume thee like a robber foe, high-born! delightful with the steeds!
Under these names the spreading band tend well the sacrifice for me.
Thou, Helper, must be known as our Preserver, Father and Mother of mankind for ever.
Man eats of savoury fruit and then takes, even as he wills, his rest.
9 Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, Dasas here belong.
Vaiçvanara, Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; verily he accepts (the ewe) made suitable by the year; he does
The end of sacrifice or its inception; yea, thou endowest him with power and riches.
7 So also, Indra-Varuna, may our princes have riches swift to save, with Gods to guard themThey whose great might gives victory in battles, and their triumphant glory spreads with swiftness.
g For food thee! For proper food thee! For strength thee! For the conquering of strength thee!
1. I HAVE enriched the singer with surpassing wealth; I have allowed the holy hymn to strengthen me.
many leaves and many branches; this [4] among trees is rich in cattle; verily he becomes rich in cattle.
c Thou art surrounding; thou art the world; thou art the restrainer; thou art the supporter; do thou go,
of) these twenty nights. Then indeed they acquired both the holy power (Brahman) and food, and
2 Without whom naught exists, Indra the Lofty One; in whom alone all powers heroic are combined.
Then are thy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. Let us not stir to wrath thy mighty arrow.
May mighty Indra pouring forth in bounty bestow on us good roads and perfect safety;
Grant me, Nasatyas, riches in abundance, wealth famous and accompanied with children.
Usas approaches in her splendour, driving all evil darkness far away, the Goddess.
3 Thee for our messenger we choose, thee, the Omniscient, for our Priest.
6. Yea, kin by common ancestry, the Maruts, even the oxen, close united friends!
The two world-halves, the spirited, the beautiful, because the Father hath clothed them in goodly forms.
him. If a man be a long time ill, he should sacrifice with (the rite) of nine nights; for his breaths are
8. Flow on to indra, Soma, carefully effused: let sickness stay afar together with the fiend!
Grant power to us and to our wealthy patrons, and cause our holy rites to be successful.
(steed) it carried the gods, as Arvan (courser) the Asuras, as Vajin (racer) the Gandharvas, as Açva
2 So humbly worship Varuna the Mighty revere the wise Guard of World Immortal.
on either side of the sacrificial cake; verily with strength and with wealth he surrounds on either side the
Him who distributes wealth to Manu's progeny, that he may grant us here riches most excellent.
Lords of all wealth, at sunset or at wakingtime, or be it at the noon of day,
offering should he make who desires, 'May I cause strife between the ruling class and the people.' As he
For he who worships hath the grace of Mitra, fighter in the van. '
3 I laud thee Jatavedas, thee Lord of all blessings, with my song.
Even he who is adorned with Surya's arrowy beam, Father of hymns, whose wisdom is beyond our
turning away (from earth), who perform the Prsthas in succession. The Tryaha is reversed, for the return
r These have sat down in the world of good action.
10 Then Heaven himself, the mighty, at that Dragon's roar reeled back in terror when, Indra, thy
5. Three several words are uttered: kine are lowing, cows who give the milk; the tawny-hued goes bellowing on.
To golden Indra ever close to his bay steeds, the thunder-armed, the golden one!
Then-at your glad carouse-let men joy in thy love, Sweet juice! as kine in pasture. Thou. art waxing
What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as a father, art invoked.
5 Kine, steeds, and hero strength he gains, and prospers, by the Adityas sped,
2. O Brahmanaspati, make thou Kakshivan Ausija a loud Chanter of flowing Soma juice!
He did a deed ne'er done, ne'er to be equalled, whereby the Sun and Moon ascend alternate.
5 That chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of gold,
g Homage to you that are great, and to you that are small homage!
For Pusan the rectum; for the blind serpent the large entrails; serpents with the entrails; seasons with the
breast, ye gods shall greet with sounds of satisfaction this (porridge)!
8 Adorable mid Gods, the Priest good to mankind shall bring thee near.
Round heaven and earth from ancient time have travelled, Night with her dark limbs, Dawn with limbs
3 For both the warp and woof he understandeth, and in due time shall speak what should be spoken,
6 Now have I praised the Forest Queen, sweet-scented, redolent of balm,
Father, begetter of the Gods, most skilful, the buttress of the heavens and earth's supporter.
4 O Indra-Varuna, vouchsafe us riches with store of treasure, food, and every blessing;
Salavrki thrice ran round on all sides the earth. So they won the earth, and in that they won it therefore is
7 In strength and wisdom all the Gods, Indra, have yielded unto thee.
Closely allied with Surya and with Morning, Adityas, and Angirases, and Vasus.
9 We seek to gain the friendly love of thee that Strong and Mighty One,
13 Gold-hued and lovely in his course, througb tangles of the wool he flows,
1. (Agni) has shouted loud: may he here well perform his work! Spread thyself out, O Agni, over the far-reaching
This was his manly exploit, he slew Vrtra and let loose the floods, lauding his own imperial sway.
7 Mitra whose glory spreads afar, he who in might surpasses heaven,
9 From his dead hand I take the bow be carried, that it may be our power and might and glory.
35 As rivers swell the ocean, so our hymns of praise make Indra strong,
10 Like men in rivalry extolling princes, our Friend be Indra, wielder of the thunder.
Their hymns with Indra find a welcome place of rest: the hynins go forward to the Gods.
For which, Most Potent! thou wouldst fain bless the man here who strives for fame.
17 I, her best love, call Urvasi to meet me, her who fills air and measures out the region.
He who with might extends through all existence hears words which I, his faithful servant, utter.
20 Wherewith ye bring great bliss to him who offers gifts, wherewith ye have protected Bhujyu, Adhrigu,
'O gods having wealth, O gods granting protection, O gods drinking together', (with these words) he ties
Within this car are stored three kindred shares of food, and a skin filled with meath is rustling as the
Teaching us pleasant things by holy Order, to, us hath he thrown open all his portals.
12. The gods that dwell in heaven, and those that dwell in the atmosphere; the mighty (gods) that are fixed upon
brilliance upon himself. 'The hymn hath been uttered', he says in response at the midday pressing; the
3 These are ne'er lost, no robber ever injures them: no evil-minded foe attempts to harass them.
2 Thou, Visnu, constant in thy courses, gavest good-will to all men, and a hymn that lasteth,
The Maiden breaketh not the law of Order, day by day coming to the place appointed.
2. May the rotten rope, wafting itself against yonder army, turn it into a stench. When the enemies see from afar
Vouchsafe us quickly wealth with noble heroes, wealth which no man uho hateth us may injure.
3. For, as disposer, Agni, God, most wise in sacrifices, thou Knowest straightway the roads and paths.
3, His wealth who hath no store of kine hath ne'er found out recited laud,
1. I LAUD your Mighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is shared by all men, who created all;
1. I have taken unto myself her fortune and her glory, as a wreath off a tree. Like a mountain with broad
2 This most delightful eulogy awaits you in the man's house drink-offering hath been heated,
they drove away the Raksases. The Raksases (saying), 'Ye have done falsely', surrounded the gods on all
7. Keep ever on in an easterly direction: this is the region that the faithful cling to! When your cooked porridge has
1. O God! O Ganapati! Among us, your subjects, You are our master. Hail to you.
14. Kasyapa has created thee, Kasyapa has produced thee. Indra wore thee in human (battle); wearing thee in
4.7.70 Sukta 70 – Frustration of the Sacrifice of the Enemy
Go thou unto those Waters, O Adhvaryu, and purify with herbs what thou infusest.
12 Clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels wind, was the axle fastened there.
1. As the rising sun takes away the lustre of the stars, thus do I take away the strength of both the women and the
Rodasl stood among these furious Heroes like splendour shining with her native brightness.
two after-offerings; they make up six, the seasons are six [3]; verily he finds support in the seasons. 'O
Begin the song, seated in our assembly. Give strength for sacrifice to him who singeth.
13 Thou in the black cows and the red and in the cows with spotted skin
Gandharva of the floods, divine, beholding men, Soma, that he may reign as King of all the world.
28 These songs with every draught we pour come, Lover of the Song, to thee,
9 Agni, the mortal who hath toiled and worshipped, brought thee oblations with his kindled fuel,
11 He, King of kings, the glory of the floods, o'er all that liveth hath resistless sway.
14 From this our misery and famine set us free, from this dire curse deliver us.
deity, Surya, the deity, Candramas, the deity, the Vasus, the deity, the Rudras, the deity, the Adityas, the
May the Adityas, when we pray, grant us wide shelter and defence beyond our foes.
4 Guarded by Vayu, Gods and men who sacrifice draw near to Faith.
3. Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each voracious; foe;
bull (the. sun), full of strength, from afar protecting, with the day wanders about all the worlds-may he (the bull),
9 He who with Soma juice prepared amid the many honours thee,Verily Indra gains thereby tremendous might.
27 Its mighty strength was borrowed from the heaven and earth: its conquering force was brought from
ninth; for Varuna the tenth; for Indra the eleventh for the All-gods the twelfth; for sky and earth the side;
1.GLORIFY thou Brhaspati, the scatheless, who must be praised with hymns, sweet-tongued and
May the Disposer, radiant in this mansion with special lustre, bring the father's offspring!
6 O Agni, the Angirases discovered thee what time thou layest hidden, fleeing back from wood to wood.
7 May Aditi the Goddess guard us with the Gods: may the protecting God keep us with ceaseless care.
1. Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshipping Sudaksha's draught,
What else is Rudra, praised of men? the Maruts, Bhaga, Pusana?
39. Whatever the wife cooks aside from thee, (O husband), or the husband (cooks) unbeknown of thee, O wife,
13 Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed, the tall trees followed and the plants and herbage.
1. THE welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with might this prayer to win the Asvins,
Hither to Rishis' songs of praise and sacrifice performed by men.
20. Agni glows from the sky, to Agni, the god, belongs the broad air. The mortals kindle Agni, the bearer of
6 Eloquent, Son of Strength, Most Mighty, Agni, vouchsafe us seed and offspring, full of vigour.
9 From birth he knew even his Father's bosom, he set his voices and his streams in motion;
the breath of cattle and of the sacrificer; it is a naturally perforated one, to permit the breath to pass, and
That deed they count a glorious deed, though small to thee, a glorious deed.
2 The People of the heavens, the waters, and the earth have stablished me among the Gods with
20 E’en so let Maghavan, the loud-voiced Indra, give us true blessings, foeless, men's upholder.
They, the refulgent Sages, weave within the sky, yea, in the depths of sea, a web for ever new.
cattle from a place of sacrifice elevated in one place. It should be elevated between the seat and the
There are four Vedas—Ṛig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, andAtharva Veda. Amongst these, the Sama Veda describes God’s glories as they manifest in the celestial gods, who are in charge of administering the universe. The Sāma Veda is also the most musical and is sung in praise of the Lord. It is enchanting to those who understand it and it evokes devotion amongst its listeners.Vasava is another name for Indra, the chief of the celestial gods. He is unparalleled among souls in fame, power, and rank. Only a soul with many lifetimes of pious deeds is promoted to the position of Indra. Thus, Indra reflects the resplendent glories of God.The five senses function correctly only if the mind is attentive to them. If the mind wanders away, the senses cannot function properly. For example, you hear with your ears what people say, but if your mind wanders away while they are speaking, their words are lost to you. So the mind is the king of the senses. Shree Krishna speaks of it as reflecting his power, and later in the Bhagavad Gita, he mentions it as the sixth and most important sense (verse 15.7).Consciousness is the quality of the soul that distinguishes it from insentient matter. The difference between a living person and a dead person is the presence of consciousness in the living person’s body and its absence in a dead person’s body. Consciousness exists in the soul by the divine power of God. Hence, the Vedas state: chetanaśhchetanānām (Kaṭhopaniṣhad 2.2.13)[v27] “God is the sentience in the sentient.”
creator with the bull; bountiful through the sacrifice; heavenly through the sacrificial fee; slayer of
'Smell the tub, O great one, with broad stream rich in milk;
1. THIS is that Agni, he by whose protection, favour, and help. the singer is successful;
15. The (soma-sacrifice called) upahavya, the offering on the middle day of a sacrifice lasting a year (vishûvant),
1. E'EN to the wise let that be still a wonder to which the general name of Cow is given.
3 Excellent Pavamana, make the lights shine brightly out for us.
Sarasvati, the (cup) for Pusan, the (cup) for (Tvastr) with the wives (of the gods), the Hariyojana (cup)
10 Even thence, O 1ndra, come to us with food that gives a hundred powers,
O Aditi, and VaruVa and Mitra, Indra and Maruts, make us well and happy.
11 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels.
Mark well this sacrifice of ours and come to us: we pray to Maghavan the Vanquisher of hosts.
eater of food. It is dark, that is the form of food; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who desires food
2 The warrior, son of warrior sire, invokes thee, to gain great strength that may be won as booty:
omit a joint of the sacrifice. 'The gods, mind born, mind using', he says. The gods, mind born, mind
Asvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient Car which he who worships must invoke at eve and dawn.
should he offer to whom the sacrifice does not resort; the minor deities are the metres, the metres do not
Like a strong bull who whets his horns kpen-pointed, like a brave warrior in the fray for cattle.
drive him away, hold him afar from us: the Âdityas and Angiras shall stay near it!
Good Lord, when man from thee hath gained enjoyment, by hymns, O noblyborn, hath he obtained it.
3. When the bowstring, embracing the wood (of the bow), greets with a whiz the eaoer arrow, do thou, O Indra,
6 Indra begirt by Maruts we invoke after the ancient plan,
He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, within the worlds continually travels.
a good councillor. The Pavamana (Stomas) which are twenty-fourfold are splendour [1]; the increasing
may ear accord with the sacrifice, may mind accord with the sacrifice, may the body accord with the
5. Arise thou divine person, O Arbudi, together with thy army! This tribute has been offered to you (Arbudi and
5 Like courser racing to the prize Indu, the lover of the Gods,
5 When ye have harnessed to your cars the spotted deer, urging the thunderbolt, O Maruts, to the fray,
also created by God?” The One who built and who controls the universe alone knows. If He does not
given: that, they say, guarantees the security of one's own property.
Thou, entering the press-boards, even as men a fort, goldbued, hast settled in the vats.
Aditya Vivasvant with the Soma drink. 'With the rain of the sky I mix thee', (with these words) he
they attain rule. The Hotr (mounts) a swing; verily they mount the back of the firmament. The Adhvaryu
With thine own power and might thou slewest Vrtra: no foe hath found the end of thee in battle.
3. With the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, let Indra send us medicines to heal us!
Who, blessing most the man who sings and praises, comes with abundant wealth to his invoker.
Daksa who increases cleverness, (thee) that are acceptable to the gods, thee for those whose tongue is
O Asura, disclose thou and make visible the Cow's beloved home to the bright golden Sun.
Sudas's brown steeds, firmly-stepping, carry me and my son for progeny and glory.
When next we meet together at the central point, even there shall Aditi confirm our brotherhood.
When with the Soma juice which we have shed we make Indra, the Mighty One, our Friend.
and yet not offered. Now the Raksases are fain to hurt him who is consecrated while he sleeps. Agni [5]
6 When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusa as their offering,
9 Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round about,
12 When afterwards they woke- and missed the cattle, the speaker thus in joyful mood addressed
should pile in three layers; these worlds are three; verily he finds support [6] in these worlds. He who
19 May Ila, Mother of the herds of cattle, and Urvasi with all the streams accept us;
As best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, like Somas, good to guard the man who follows Law.
10 Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained with the stone, decking himself in waters,
5 I pour to him who looks in all directions: may he accept it with a friendly spirit.
h He doth put down the wise contrivings of every worshipper;
16 Along their paths the Mothers go, Sisters of priestly ministrants,
Wealth suited to our needs, O Stirrer of the thought, best wealth, O thou who stirrest thought.
The stalk is mixed with grain: he comes led by the men together with the sisters, and preserves the
Chanting their psalm, singing aloud, like heroes, splendid from birth, invincible, the Maruts.
15 As skilfullest of those who drive the chariot, with our art and aim,
20 This our.effectual sacrifice, reaching the sky, shall Heaven and Earth
thread, that which they have put into raw flesh, with these slay thou those that have prepared the spell!
bringer', he says [1]; verily with the holy power he brings it. 'I split apart thy urinator', he says; that is
Poured on the middle of the strainingcloth, and cooked, this bright drink hath been offered ilice.
4 Him who brought eastward, manliest with his prowess, the Maids rejoicing in the western darkness,
To concludethis chapter Shree Krishna uses the word iti in this verse, which means “these”. This is to imply that, “Arjun, here I have given you the gist of all the hidden knowledge of the Vedic Scriptures. From the description of the nature of thisworld to the differentiation between matter and spirit. Finally, the realization of the Absolute Truthabout Oneself and the Supreme Divine Personality, God. I assure you thatwhoever espouses this knowledge will be truly enlightened. Their deeds and endeavours will be definitely fruitful and take them towards their ultimate goal, which is God-realization.”
4 The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the Sages, Child!
In the human form, we tend to forget our origin and eternal form. We regard ourselves as the physical body and get attracted to our bodily relations; parents, spouse, children, material wealth, etc. We feel they are the most significant. We also forget that it is God who is the creator and sustainer of the entire universe.In this verse, Lord Shree Krishna has said that the entire creation; is the manifestation of his energy. Even the Sun gets its radiance from him. According to scientific theories, the energy emittedevery second by the sun is equivalent to millions of nuclear power plants put together, and ithas been an uninterrupted process for billions of years. Yet this energy has not reduced in any way. The glory and brilliance of the sun area part of God’s wonderful creation.Similarly, the night sky is litup by the moon. Though our mundane intellect might want us to believe and it is also scientifically concluded that moonshine is due to the reflection of the sun’s light. But the periodic movement of the moon is also part of God’s amazing creation. The sun, the moon, the planets, stars, the panch mahabhootas (earth, water, air, fire, and ether); in fact, the entire universe is a manifestation of God’s vibhūtis (opulence). It would be very naïve to think that such an amazing celestial arrangement is a result of some random big bang.There is a story in Kenopanishad, which explicates this. Once there was a prolonged war between the devatās (celestial gods) and the daityas (demons from the nether regions). Eventually, the devatās won by the grace of God. But their pride made them think that it was due to their own strength. God wanted to teach them a lesson; He manifested as an effulgent and powerful yakṣha (a semi-celestial being) in the celestial sky.When Indra, the King of Heaven saw this yakṣha, he felt insecure and intimidated. To find out who this yakṣhawas, he sent Agni, the fire god. With great pride,Agni challenged the yakṣha and said, “I am the fire god, and possess the power to burn the entire world within seconds, please reveal yourself.” The yakṣha put in front of him a piece of straw and asked if he could burn it. Agni laughed, “Can a blade of grass be a test for my immense power? Let that be.” But when he moved forward to burn it, he could not and started feeling very cold himself. God had taken away his power, defeated and embarrassed he ran back to Indra.Next, Indra sent Vayu, the wind god to inquire who this yakṣha was. He went to the yakṣha and said, “I am the wind god and possess the power to turn the world upside down within a few seconds, reveal who you are?” Again, the yakṣha put a piece of straw in front of Vayu and said, “Turn this over if you can?” Vayu smirked with pride and tried to blow it, but could not. He felt powerless, and with great effort, he returned to Indra exhausted.Now Indra was raged and came to challenge theyakṣhahimself. But by then theyakṣhahad disappeared and in his place was seated Goddess Uma, God’s divineYogmayapower. A baffled Indra asked her, “O Divine Mother, please tell me who was that powerfulyakṣha?” She answered, “O imprudent child, you could not recognize Him? Your pride had blinded your prudence. He was your Supreme Father, your creator, and power source, without him you would be powerless.” Realizing his mistake, Indra begged for forgiveness.
parting metre; the voices metre; the radiant metro; the Sastubh metre; the Anustubh metre; the Kakubh
So, when ye made him young again, he stirred the longing of a dame.
With his bright foot he overthrew their magic, and went up to heaven.
1. WHAT, dearest Pair, is this in strength and riches that ye as Priests are bring from the waters?
A depth extended in the front: a passage out was made behind.
2. Flow on for us with this purification to the famed ford of thee whose due is glory!
1. Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee: cleansed by the men speed forward to the battle!
Thence to the worshipper he giveth riches: may he enrich us also when we laud him.
he produces it from its own birthplace. 'O Adhvaryu, didst thou seek the waters?' he says; 'they came to
4. He surely did bring hither all the beings (worlds), he surely did encompass all the beings (worlds). Being their
7 My lauds, like envoys, craving loving-kindness, go forth to Indra with their strong entreaty,
6 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well, O God, art thou,
He makes his son preeminent in hero might - he serves with reverential prayer.
Our gracious-minded Helper in our deeds of might, be thou, O Excellent, this day.
Trita roars out at him who aims the lightning-flash. The waters sweeping round are thundering on their
navel, to avoid injury. (The mortar) is of Udumbara wood; the Udumbara is strength; verily he wins
choice part (of the beast), the shoulder from the fore part, the intestines from the middle, the hip from
Like a father his son, I weary her with my words;
11. This, (O winnowing-basket), is thy purpose, and this thy nature: may Aditi, mother of heroes, take hold of thee!
Three that give warmth to all attend the morning. All these have they discovered, these Vasisthas.
3 Come thou with hundreds, come with thousands in thy team to this our solemn rite, to taste the
2 Wherewith thou bolpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, and the God
Come, ye for whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, come ye with love to Sobbari.
3 As such defend and succour us, with benedictions speak to us:
6. The Somas deck themselves with milk as kings are graced with eulogies,
potsherds. To Anumati an oblation (is made). To Ka (offering is made) on one potsherd.
To him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to Agni let the lauds go forth!
The wise have drawn him like a ship through water: the floods obedient have descended hither.
Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of Surya and reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.
Freedom from sin may Aditi vouchsafe us: the Steed with our oblations gain us lordship!
2 For be is true, whpm men of old enkindled, and the Gods themselves,
4 These Somas swift and brown of hue, in stream of solemn sacrifice
31 I saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, approaching by his pathways and departing.
As thoughtful Pavamana, urge O Indu, speeding the kine, the plant's wave on to Indra.
33. As long as I look out upon thee, O earth, with Sûrya (the sun) as my companion, so long shall my sight not
Like rays for our enjoyment, Lords to feed us, ye, like quick bearers, have obeyed our calling.
them down after carrying them round in order; therefore it rains in all the seasons. Since having put
4. If thou slayest our cow, if our horse or our domestic, we pierce thee with the lead, so that thou shalt not slay our
Much that is yet undone must I accomplish; one must I combat and the other question.
Gladly bring yearning Fathers nigh to cat the food of sacrifice.
6 Around thy dwelling-place, O brightly-shining Priest, are men at sacrifice, whose sacred grass is
8 Born suddenly, by plants he grew to greatness, when tender shoots with holy oil increased him,
May all the Gods discomfit him! My nearest, closest mail is prayer, my closest armour and defence.
The sacrifice is Manu, Providence, our Sire. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
6 Fair wealth, O Savitar, to-day, to-morrow, fair wealth produce for us each day that passes.
stream of wealth is desires; verily he wins desires. If he desire of a man, 'May I separate his breaths and
the Arka the Arka is piled. With fourteen verses he scatters; the domesticated plants are seven, the wild
Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day I have gone to heaven.
As Indra's thunderbolt, Steer with farspreading wealth, Soma is flowing on to make the heart rejoice.
Vasat cry, his Vasat cry would be exhausted; if he were not to utter the Vasat cry, the Raksases would
God, thy Bays turn not from the rite which Law ordains.
15. Reverence be to thee coming, reverence to thee going; reverence, O Rudra, be to thee standing, and
v Willingly do thou, O god Soma, go to the dear place of Indra with the Tristubh metre.
2 O pleasant Food, O Food of meath, thee have we chosen for our own,
6 As floods according to their stream flow onward, so to the sea, as borne on cars, the waters.
radiance, play, delight, what is born, what is to be born, good words, good deeds, finding, what there is
4 In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great deed, O Satakratu, Mighty One!
2. Now like a swan hemaketh all the company sing each his hymm
When o'er the flood thou broughtest them, O Hero, thou keptest Turvaga and Yadu safely.
f For health I unite thee, for offspring; may the All-gods, common to all men, unite thee with the
Thou didst refresh the streams and force the billows: thou, Indra, settest free obstructed rivers.
t Thou art imperishable, for imperishableness thee; mayst thou not perish for me, yonder, in yonder
5 He who supports the worlds of life, he who well knows the hidden names mysterious of the morning
Pour down the flood of meath within thy belly: thou from of old art King of Soma juices.
29. To the pure earth I speak, to the ground, the soil that has grown through the brahma (spiritual exaltation).
3. Thou art the Lord of Somas pressed, Somas unpressed are also thine:
The holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our praise, when singers have approached his beauteous
'The strong steed hath stepped forth', with these two (verses) he makes it step forth; (with two) of the
1. GODDESS of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight.
h Thou art the step of Visnu, smiter of the hostile one; with the Anustubh metre I stop across the
The new and the full moon (sacrifices) are the chariot of the gods. He, who having offered the new and
To lose God means to let the mind wander away from him, and to be with him means to unite the mind with him. The easy way to unite the mind with God is to learn to see everything in its connection with him. For example, let us say that someone hurts us. It is the nature of the mind to develop sentiments of resentment, hatred, etc. toward anyone who harms us. However, if we permit that to happen, then our mind comes away from the divine realm, and the devotional union of our mind with God ceases. Instead, if we see the Supreme Lord seated in that person, we will think, “God is testing me through this person. He wants me to increase the virtue of tolerance, and that is why he is inspiring this person to behave badly with me. But I will not permit the incident to disturb me.” Thinking in this way, we will be able to prevent the mind from becoming a victim of negative sentiments.Similarly, the mind separates from God when it gets attached to a friend or relative. Now, if we train the mind to see God in that person, then each time the mind wanders toward him or her, we will think, “Shree Krishna is seated in this person, and thus I am feeling this attraction.” In this manner, the mind will continue to retain its devotional absorption in the Supreme.Sometimes, the mind laments over past incidents. This again separates the mind from the divine realm because lamentation takes the mind into the past and the present contemplation of God and Guru ceases. Now if we see that incident in connection with God, we will think, “The Lord deliberately arranged for me to experience tribulation in the world, so that I may develop detachment. He is so concerned about my welfare that he mercifully arranges for the proper circumstances that are beneficial for my spiritual progress.” By thinking thus, we will be able to protect our devotional focus. Sage Narad states:loka hānau chintā na kāryā niveditātma loka vedatvāt (Nārad Bhakti Darshan, Sūtra 61)[v23]“When you suffer a reversal in the world, do not lament or brood over it. See the grace of God in that incident.” Our self-interest lies in somehow or the other keeping the mind in God, and the simple trick to accomplish this is to see God in everything and everyone. That is the practice stage, which slowly leads to the perfection that is mentioned in this verse, where we are never lost to God and he is never lost to us.
Much may we too achieve, O mightiest Indra, with our great power, we Maruts, when we will it.
1. As in the first old times, as all were wont, as now, he draweth forth the power turned hitherward with
5 He shines in splendour like the Sun, refulgent as bright gold is he,
Bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
Thou slewest Ahi who besieged the waters, and duggest out their all-supporting channels.
2 The Two exceeding wise, the Sons of Daksa, whom the gods ordained
3. I have called upon heaven and earth, I have called upon the goddess Sarasvatî, I have called upon both Indra
The waters and the plants, promote the songs we sing: come Bhaga, Rati, and the Vaijns to my call.
deity, Brhati the metre [2], thou art the vessel of the pure (Soma). Candramas is the deity, Satobrhati the
His care is that which speeds his might in conflicts, like wind borne onward by the clouds that thunder.
Whom here the youthful Maids together kindle, his food is sacred oil of golden colour.
Eager for the gods, do thou sacrifice to them with oblation;
extend to greatness, then prosperity did enter thee, (and) thou didst fashion the four regions.
10 Bring with joint invocations thou, O Agni, the celestial host:
'Thou I art secure; may I be secure among my equals', he says; verily he makes them secure.' 'Thou art
make firm the earth, harm not the earth, for all expiration, cross-breathing, up-breathing, for support [1],
Give ample room and freedom for our dwelling, a home, ye Hemispheres, which none may rival.
the beginning of the sacrifice [4], the fourfold Stoma is the beginning of the sacrifice; verily he
b Agni is thy yoke-fellow, O steed; I grasp thee; bear me prosperously.
Vaiçvanara he places on the Ahavaniya, that to the Maruts on the Garhapatya, for the avoidance of
Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful Singer, like Sura by his fair and open pathways.
makes the holy power (Brahman). He speaks the Yajus, muttering; it is as if one who has found a rich
7 As rushing down the rapids of a river, flow swifter than the wind the vigorous currents,
For glory have they gone, as milk to Soma, to Indra-Varuna my thoughts and praises.
e Thou art the portion of Aditi, the overlordship of Pusan, force saved, the twenty-sevenfold Stoma.
He brake in pieces Susna's brood who still expected not the stroke, and won for us the heavenly
find support. There are twelve Ekavinças, for support; verily they place radiance in themselves [2].
With loving kindness of the gods to whom sacrifice is made.
When ministering priests with strong devotion bring to you Twain the first taste of the Soma.
garments is accursed; (the son born) of intercourse in the forest is a thief; (the son born) of intercourse
gods; verily to the gods he announces the sacrifice. 'Thou art advance; for right thee! Quicken right', he
with the fourfold Stoma; in that there is the fourfold Stoma, (it is) to make whole the horse.
The great danger we face is that we may not get the human form in the next life, and instead go into the lower species of life, such as animals, birds, the nether regions, etc. We cannot be complacent that the human form will remain reserved for us, for the next birth will be determined by our karmas and level of consciousness in this life.There are 8.4 million species of life in existence. The species below human beings—animals, birds, fishes, insects, birds, etc.—do not have an evolved intellect as we humans do. Yet, they also perform commonplace activities such as eating, sleeping, defending, and mating. Human beings have been endowed with the faculty of knowledge, for a higher purpose, so that they may utilize it to elevate themselves. If humans utilize their intellects merely for doing the animalistic activities of eating, sleeping, mating, and defending, in a deluxe way, it is a misuse of the human form. For example, if someone makes eating as the primary pleasure of life, then the body of a pig becomes more suitable for such a person, and thus, that individual receives a pig’s body in the next life. If someone makes sleeping the goal of life, then God deems that the body of a polar bear is more suitable for such activity and allots it in the succeeding life. So the great danger before us is that we may not get a human birth in the next life. The Vedas state:iha chedavedīdatha satyamasti na chedihāvedīnmahatī vinaṣhṭhiḥ(Kenopaniṣhad 2.5) [v35]“O human being, the human birth is a rare opportunity. If you do not utilize it to achieve your goal, you will suffer great ruin.” Again, they state:iha chedaśhakad boddhuṁ prākśharīrasya visrasaḥtataḥ sargeṣhu lokeṣhu śharīratvāya kalpate (Kaṭhopaniṣhad 2.3.4) [v36]“If you do not strive for God-realization in this life, you will continue to rotate in the 8.4 million species of life for many births.”However, once we commence on the journey of spiritual practice then even if we do not complete the path in this life, God sees that our intention to do so existed. Therefore, he grants us the human birth again, to enable us to continue from where we had left off. In this way, we avert the great danger.Also, Shree Krishna says that no loss ever comes from endeavor made on this path. This is because whatever material assets we accumulate in the present life have to be left behind at the time of death. But if we make any spiritual advancement on the path of Yog, God preserves it, and gives us the fruits in the next life, enabling us to start off from where we had left. Thus, having informed Arjun about its benefits, Shree Krishna now begins instructing him about the science of working without attachment.
wins food, and the holy class [2] puts over the people. The Parna is the royalty, the Açvattha is the
8 Indra. and Varuna, Gods whom we are lauding, mingle ye wealth with our heroic glory.
6. When war and battles are on foot, booty is offered to the bold.
(heavenly) light, into which (the fires) rain (flowed) as ghee, carried out the sacrifice.
Udumbara wood; the Udumbara is strength; verily he confers strength upon him. Prajapati created Agni;
1. Flow forth, O Soma, flow thou onward, sweet to Indra's Mitra's, Pushan's, Bhaga's taste.
4.6.85 Sukta 85 – Exorcism of Disease by means of an Amulet from the Varana Tree
drum, shout against the enemies, frighten them away, and bewilder their minds!
9 And she, the young, the joyous-spirited, divulged the path to Syava, yea, to me.
soothed they approach this world. 'Heaven and earth', he says, for the sacrifice is in heaven and earth.
1. I BALM with oil the mighty Raksas-slayer; to the most famous Friend I come for shelter
him, for in him offspring and cattle have entered; verily also the male horse straightway wins offspring
8 Thou, glowing Pusan, carriest an awl that urges men to prayer;
9. With offerings, Pavamana! men have strengthened thee as Law commands:
4 The Bull is bellowing; the Cows are coming nigh: the Goddesses approach the God's own restingplace.
In the mode of goodness, the miseries of material existence reduce, and worldly desires become subdued. This gives rise to a feeling of contentment with one’s condition. This is a good thing, but it can have a negative side too. For instance, those who experience pain in the world and are disturbed by the desires in their mind feel impelled to look for a solution to their problems, and this impetus sometimes brings them to the spiritual path. However, those in goodness can easily become complacent and feel no urge to progress to the transcendental platform. Also, sattva guṇa illumines the intellect with knowledge. If this is not accompanied by spiritual wisdom, then knowledge results in pride and that pride comes in the way of devotion to God. This is often seen in the case of scientists, academicians, scholars, etc. The mode of goodness usually predominates in them, since they spend their time and energy cultivating knowledge. And yet, the knowledge they possess often makes them proud, and they begin to feel that there can be no truth beyond the grasp of their intellect. Thus, they find it difficult to develop faith toward either the scriptures or the God-realized Saints.In the mode of passion, the souls are impelled toward intense activity. Their attachment to the world and preference for pleasure, prestige, wealth, and bodily comforts, propels them to work hard in the world for achieving these goals, which they consider to be the most important in life. Rajo guṇa increases the attraction between man and woman, and generates kām (lust). To satiate that lust, man and woman enter into the relationship of marriage and have a home. The upkeep of the home creates the need for wealth, so they begin to work hard for economic development. They engage in intense activity, but each action creates karmas, which further bind them in material existence.The mode of ignorance clouds the intellect of the living being. The desire for happiness now manifests in perverse manners. For example, everyone knows that cigarette smoking is injurious to health. Every cigarette pack carries a warning to that extent issued by the government authorities. Cigarette smokers read this, and yet do not refrain from smoking. This happens because the intellect loses its discriminative power and does not hesitate to inflict self-injury to get the pleasure of smoking. As someone jokingly said, “A cigarette is a pipe with a fire at one end and a fool at the other.” That is the influence of tamo guṇa, which binds the soul in the darkness of ignorance.
1. COME gracious to our sacrifice, O Indra: pressed Soma-drops are purified to please thee.
3 Ye with your strength have pierced the fountains of the floods: the Sun have ye brought forward as
And made thine own this great earth and these water-floods; with joyous heart these waterfloods.
rite is redundant, the correct sacrifice is the five-night rite. He who knowing thus sacrifices with the
Even as the Soma (sacrifices) come together in competition, so the new and full moon (sacrifices) are
Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, and lengthen out the days of our existence.
5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands.
9 Thus they go forth with undiminished colours, these Mornings similar, in self-same fashion,
7 Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, deceiving and tormenting, causing grievous
20 Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest, let not the hatchet linger in thy body.
There are three reddish-brown ones for spring; three dappled ones for summer; three piebald (deer) for
Drive thou thy horses, Vayu, come to us with love, come well-inclined and loving us.
2. Of the hundred remedies which thou hast, of the thousand that have been collected, this is the most excellent
'Should an animal be offered to Vayu, or to Prajapati?' they say; if he were to offer it to Vayu, he would
7 Indra and Agni, these our songs of praise have sounded forth to you:
Bestow a wealthy home on men, O Son of Strength. Give Vitahavya riches spreading far and wide, give
Whatever the gods did at the sacrifice the Asuras did. The gods saw the cups with the Agrayana at their
verily he wins brilliance. There is a Pañcadaça (Stoma); verily he wins power. There is a Saptadaça
Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids wherewith in fight ye speed the war-cry to the spoil.
33. O (instrument of) wood, settle down upon the strewn barhis, in keeping with the divinities and the agnishloma
Here, the inimical nature of kām or lust is being made even more explicit by Lord Krishna. kām means “desire,” duṣhpūreṇa means “insatiable,” anala means “inexhaustible.” Desire overpowers the discriminatory power of the wise and lures them to fulfill it. However, the more they attempt to dowse the fire of desire, the more strongly it burns. The Buddha states:na kahāpaṇa vassena, titti kāmesu vijjatiappassādā kāmā dukhā kāmā, iti viññāya paṇḍito (Dhammapada verse 186) [v20]“Desire burns like an unquenchable fire, which never brings happiness to anyone. The wise renounce it, knowing it to be the root of misery.” But those who do not understand this secret waste away their life in the futile pursuit of trying to satiate their lust.
2 With him loud-roaring, ever watchful, Victor, bold, hard to overthrow, Rouser of battle,
v Thy winged (steeds) have charged them as they are wont;
Having established the benefits of worshipping the Supreme, Shree Krishna now explains how easy it is to do so. In the worship of the devatās and the ancestors, there are many rules to propitiate them, which must be strictly followed. But God accepts anything that is offered with a loving heart. If you have only a fruit, offer it to God, and He will be pleased. If there is no fruit available, offer Him a flower. If it is not the season for flowers, offer God a mere leaf; even that will suffice, provided it is a gift of love. If leaves are also scarce, make an offering of water, which is available everywhere, but ensure again that you do it with devotion. The word bhaktyā has been used in both the first and second lines of the verse. It is the bhakti of the devotee that is pleasing to God, and not the worth of the offering.By making this wonderful statement, Shree Krishna reveals the merciful divine nature of God. He is not concerned with the material value of our offering. Rather, He values, above everything else, the love with which we make the offering. Thus, the Hari Bhakti Vilas states:tulasī-dala-mātreṇa jalasya chulukena chavikrīṇīte svam ātmānaṁ bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ (11.261)“If you offer God with sincere love, just a Tulsī leaf and as much water as you can hold in your palm, He will offer Himself to you in return because He is endeared by love.” How wonderful it is that the Supreme Master of unlimited universes, whose glorious qualities and virtues are amazing beyond description, and by whose mere thought multitudes of universes come into existence and disappear again, accepts even the most humble offering of His devotee that is given with genuine love. The word used here is prayatātmanaḥ, implying, “I accept the offerings of those whose hearts are pure.”The Shreemad Bhagavatam contains exactly the same verse as the above verse of the Bhagavad Gita. While eating dry rice at the house of His friend, Sudama, Shree Krishna said:patraṁ puṣhpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayachchhatitadahaṁ bhaktyupahṛitam aśhnāmi prayatātmanaḥ (10.81.4)“If one offers Me with devotion, a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or even water, I delightfully partake of that article offered with love by My devotee in pure consciousness.”Whenever God descends upon the earth, He exhibits this quality in His divine Pastimes. Before the Mahabharat war, when Shree Krishna went to Hastinapur to explore the possibility of fashioning an agreement between the Kauravas and Pandavas, the evil Duryodhan had proudly prepared for Him a meal with fifty-six different items. However, Shree Krishna rejected his hospitality and instead went to the humble hut of Vidurani, who had been longing deeply for the opportunity to serve her beloved Lord. Vidurani was overjoyed on receiving the Supreme Lord at her home. All she had to offer was bananas, but her intellect so benumbed with loving sentiments that she did not even realize she was dropping the fruit and putting the banana peels in His mouth. Nevertheless, seeing her devotion, Shree Krishna blissfully ate the peels, as if they were the most delicious food in the world.
21. It has shone upon thee, light has arisen, darkness has departed from thee. We remove from thee death,
1. Come, priest, and of the savoury juice pour forth a yet more gladdening draught!
mouth one. The one it grasped by the mouth it sucked; therefore two oblations are made of the pure
11. Indra has awakened the poet, saying: 'Arise, move about, and sing; of me, the strong, verily, sing the praises;
When the intellect is dulled under the effect of tamo guṇa, it clings to a fragmental concept as if it were the complete truth. People with such views often become fanatic about what they perceive to be the Absolute Truth. Their understanding is usually not even rational, nor grounded in the scriptures or in reality, and yet they zealously desire to impose their beliefs on others. The history of humankind has repeatedly seen religious zealots who imagine themselves as self-appointed champions of God and defenders of faith. They fanatically proselytize and find a few followers with the same kind of intellect, creating the phenomenon of the blind leading the blind. However, in the name of serving God and religion, they create disruption in society and obstruct its harmonious growth.
7 Men, Agni, have established thee as welcome Priest at holy rites,
Varuna, Mitra, we invoke for welfare, and Agni, and the thunder-wielding Indra.
5 That chariot of the Asvins, fair to look on, pleaseth me well, yoked with a thought, refulgent,
5 The foolish brought the ne'er-bewildered forward, great, Victor, Song-inspirer, Fort-destroyer.
At harnessing whereof Heaven's Daughter springs to birth, and from Vivasvan come auspicious Night
9 What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra hath not done?
With resonant hymns all Gods who guard our bodies have offered up oblation in this Agni.
fast without eating, he would be hungry; if he were to eat, Rudra would plan evil against his cattle; he
7 The foeman's treasure may be won with labour: may we be masters of our own possessions.
3 Like Vayu with his team, moving at pleasure, most gracious when invoked like both Nasatyas,
2 Verily no one knoweth whence they sprang: they, and they only, know each other's birth.
Here have I seen the auspicious reins that guide thee, which those who guard the holy Law keep
7 Ten rapid fingers deck the Courser in the jar: with hymns the holy singers send their voices forth.
Thou favourest the Maruts known to all, by song and sacrifice.
19 To magnify the God, the God, Indra, yea, Indra for your help,
13 The Visvamitras have sung forth this prayer to Indra Thunder-aimed:
flesh-devouring, swift as the wind, shall fasten themselves upon the enemies, together with the Trishamdhi-bolt
f Agni is full of life; he is full of life through the trees; with this life I make thee full of life. Soma is full
8. Slain of the worms is the yevâsha, slain further is the nadaniman; all have I crushed down like lentils with a millstone.
2 White-hued and thundering he dwells in splendour, Most Youthful, with the loudvoiced and eternalAno Bhadraha Kritavayo Yantu Vishwataha (Let noble thoughts come from every side) – Rg Veda
8 Thou, Agni, like an able steed, art urged by wisdom in the wood.
Black is thy path, Agni, changeless, with glittering waves! when like a bull thou rushest eager to the
23 Gift of Paijavana, four horses bear me in foremost place, trained steeds with pearl to deck them.
having driven away his foes from these worlds and having conquered he mounts upon the world of his
10 A Rbhu art thou, Agni, near to be adored thou art the Sovran Lord of foodful spoil and wealth.
Firm is the seat of Varuna: over the Seven he rules as King.
1. The goddess Prisniparnî has prepared prosperity for us, mishap for Nirriti (the goddess of destruction). For she
round, he would make Rudra come within (the sacrifice). Or rather they say, 'In what quarter is Rudra or
19. As splendour is in the earth, as in this Gâtavedas (the fire), thus shall the amulet of varana hold fast, &c.
[3]. In that it is on eight potsherds, it is connected with Agni; in that it is of panic seeds, it is connected
speech which has entered this (earth); verily also they conquer the earth. All (forms of) speech they
Vairapa Saman, the deity the Maruts, the treasure the peasant class.
Like car-borne men the stones their path have chosen: let the priest, quickened, celebrate our worship.
born; verily with the year he produces cattle for him. He offers on a blade of Darbha grass [1]; the
2 As God comprising Gods by Law Eternal, bear, as the Chief who knoweth, our oblation,
9 Thou hurledst forth from heaven the iron missile, brought by the Skilful, from the sling of leather,
3 All mortals come to thee for aid, the God of most observant mind.
The fourth cup undisturbed, immortal, let him drink who giveth wealth, the cup of the wealth-giving God.
Shinest, true Singer! mid the upholders of the voice. Increase thy Consorts thou, lively at sacrifice.
Be near us, keep us from reproach and trouble. Father and Mother, with your help preserve us.
him to both gods and men. He should not utter speech until the Naksatras appear. If he were to utter
l Thou art brilliance; follow thou brilliance; may Agni not take away the brilliance.
if he were to put another brick higher, he would obstruct the breath and life of cattle [3] and of the
They follow close his many laws to win them due preeminence, good in their
Thou ever rulest all the highest: in the fray for cattle none resisteth thee.
2.6.9.18 Mantra 18: The Mantras for the Offering to the Colors
2.1.2.9 Mantra 9: The Taking of the Soma to the Hall
8 The Sister quitteth, for the elder Sister, her place, and having looked on her departeth.
d (The fire) to be piled is the body of Agni, Vaiçvanara is the self; in that he offers to Vaiçvanara after
This your all-feedin sacrifice approaches: come all united, fraught, as 'twere with viands.
greatness. With the majesty of the heavenly dog, with that oblation would we pay homage to thee!
of births. Closely united with these women they found out the six broad (directions); spying out a road he has
4 Ye Deities who stay with us, and all ye Gods of all mankind,
6 He who maintains the Laws of God informed me that thou wast lying hidden in the waters.
7 He smote away the floods' obstructer, Vrtra; Earth, conscious, lent her aid to speed thy thunder.
thee. Great Indra protects thee unceasingly. Do thou, O earth, cause us to brighten as if at the sight of gold: not
9 When in my dwelling-place I see the wicked enemies of Gods,
7 Now and of old the home of wealth, the mansion of what is born and what was born aforetime,
And round about flock winged birds from all the boundaries of heaven.
3 Five paces have I risen from Earth. I follow her who hath four feet with devout observance.
2. Hither have his bay steeds been sent, red steeds are on the sacred grass
3 Like babes in arms reposing on their mother, let the Gods sit upon the grass's summit.
has eight syllables; the Rudras are eleven, the Tristubh has eleven syllables; the Adityas are twelve, the
9 And these, bestowed as sacrificial guerdon, the powerful tawny steeds of Marutasva;
3 Chief Friend of Gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with thy stream,
27 May the strong Bay Steeds, yoked by prayer, bring hither unto us our Friend,
And places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice,-these through my spirit's fervid glow have I
1. The asvattha (ficus religiosa) has mounted the samî (mimosa suma): then a male child was produced. That,
a The maker of the sound 'Him' is Vayu, the Prastotr is Agni, the Saman is Prajapati, the Udgatr is
befalls him; he prospers and his enemy is defeated. Stoma serves Stoma; verily he makes his enemy his
man. He places them going away (from the place of sacrifice); verily he drives away Nirrti from him [3].
16 Who yokes to-day unto the pole of Order the strong and passionate steers of checkless spirit,
10.36.14, 10.37.2, 10.37.7, 10.43.10, 10.63.8, 10.71.1, 10.71.2, 10.71.5, 10.71.6, 10.71.7, 10.81.2,
e He should pile (the fire) of a thousand (bricks) when first piling (it); this world is commensurate with a
Which, Maghavan, at thy will thou drivest hither. With these subdue for us the men who hate us.
Vaiçvanara. He puts down salt; salt is the nourishment and the propagating; verily he piles the fire in
Speaking in a chastising mood, Shree Krishna now delivers a word of caution. We should not think we have complete liberty to do what we wish. The soul does not lead an independent existence; it is dependent upon God’s creation in many ways. In the materially bound state, it is under the influence of the three guṇas. The combination of guṇas creates our nature, and according to its dictates, we are compelled to act. Hence, we do not have absolute freedom to say, “I will do what I like.” We have to choose between the good advice of God and the scriptures or the compulsions of our nature. There is an anecdote regarding one’s nature. A soldier retired after thirty years of service and returned to his hometown. One day, he was standing in the coffee shop drinking a cup of tea, when a friend thought of a practical joke. He screamed from behind, “Attention!” Responding to that command had become a part of the soldier’s nature. Involuntarily, he dropped the cup from his hand and put his hands by his side. Shree Krishna warns Arjun that by nature he is a warrior, and if, out of pride, he decides not to listen to good advice, his Kshatriya nature will still compel him to fight.
Whene'er a man brings thee to thine enjoyment, thou swallowest the plants most greedy eater.
Even as a vigorous horse when he comes near the mare, announce to us good forturue, Bird, on every
and they revolve round their own metre. They go by a trackless way leaving the path who start with
expiration is in front of the navel [3], the inspiration behind; verily he cuts off from the whole extent of
Thou, Indra, whom our hearts praise highly in the war, grant shelter, Maghavan, to us who love thee
Following close the sea, the wave of waters, the great Bull tells his fourth form and declares it.
6 When, strong in strength and armed with potent weapons, they had united wellformed earth and
1) Shaunakiya edition (35, 36, 31, 105, 31, 142, 139, 8, 8, 8, 10, 5, 4, 2, 1, 9, 1, 4, 72, 143) AND the
3 With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi's sake; I guarded Kutsa well with these saving helps.
9 The virgins deck thee o'er fresh streams to drive thee to the sieve when thou,
9 Over all woes and dangers, Jatavedas, bear us as in a boat across a river.
3 O Indra, Lord of boundless might, for us thou winnest strength and kine,
1. STONE-DARTING Indra. Wondrous One, what wealth is richly given from thee,
That bounteous man through food shall conquer faemen, and win him opulence and wealthy people.
The pious Aryan tribes at sacrifices address them first to him who doeth marvels.
He hath become all the worlds, he hath come to be.
whole of the sacrifice is not performed, in so far does the sacrifice come to ruin, and the sacrificer comes
brought (something) to a superior one proclaims (it); in that he puts it down, it is as when having
7 May we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juice thou givest, like ancestral riches.
36. Pack thyself up, go forth! O Agni, prepare the roads, that lead to the gods! By these: well-prepared (roads)
The wife attracts the husband: with a shout of joy the man's auspicious marriage is performed aright.
2 At birth of these two Gods all Gods are joyful: they have caused darkness, which we hate, to vanish.
make a pairing. He makes it with a triple stand; these worlds are three; (verily it serves) to obtain these
4. Love's consuming longing, together with yearning, which Indra and Agni have poured into the waters, that do I
10 And these, the Sons, the Singers, in their racings have enlarged the bounds,
3. Priest doubly born, he through his love of glory hath in his keeping all things worth the choosing.
33 We pray to thee for this thy gift, Victor the gift that faileth not,
strength I have held fast that sap of his. May the sun rise as light from the darkness!
they fasten a (beast) for killing in front; (verily it serves) for distinction. 'Fear not men', (with these
connected with all the gods. To Vayu should he offer it who desires wealth. the swiftest deity is Vayu;
Agni who puts the ash into the waters; he places it (in the pan) with (verses) containing the word 'light';
Yearning with love both Worlds approached, the Waters waited on Indra when he first had being.
Sections, Chapters and Decades, the following overview summarizes the numbering to allow the reader
6 Splendour encompassed thee, forth shone thy warrior might: the rain-obstructer lay in mid-air's lowest
4 Yea, very hard art thou to grasp, like offspring of the wriggling snakes,
1. Pour out the drops f or Indra; let him drink the meath of Soma Juice!
r With thy dread countenance guard me, Agni; content me; hurt me not.
1. Here is the Soma ready pressed: of this the Maruts, yea, of this
acquiring their physical needs and with chanting the mantras without understanding what they
In spiritual practice, the intention of the mind is what matters, not the external activities. One may be living in the holy land of Vrindavan, but if the mind contemplates on eating rasgullās in Kolkata, one will be deemed to be living in Kolkata. Conversely, if a person lives amidst the hubbub of Kolkata and keeps the mind absorbed in the divine landof Vrindavan, he will get the benefit of residing there. All the Vedic scriptures state that our level of consciousness is determined by the state of our mind:mana eva manuṣhyāṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ bandha mokṣhayoḥ(Pañchadaśhī)“The mind is the cause of bondage, and the mind is the cause of liberation.” Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj states the same principle:bandhan aur mokṣha kā, kāraṇ manahi bakhānyāte kauniu bhakti karu, karu mana te haridhyān(Bhakti Śhatak verse 19)“Bondage and liberation depend upon the state of the mind. Whatever form of devotion you choose to do, keep the mind engaged in meditation upon God.”Those who do not possess this spiritual vision see the external distinction between a karm sanyāsī and a karm yogi, and declare the karm sanyāsī to be superior because of the external renunciation. But those who are learned see that both the karm sanyāsī and the karm yogi have absorbed their minds in God, and so they are both identical in their internal consciousness.
Favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
The Rsis have poured in continuous Soma drops, ordainers who adorn thee, Friend whom Rsis love.
They kill the Soma in that they press it; in that there is (an oblation) of Soma, that is as when they slay
c The theologians say, 'Since the fire is piled with clay and water, then why is it called the fire?' In that
14 We have prepared this laud for you, O Asvins, and, like the Bhrgus, as a car have framed it,
16 Let the milch-kine that have no calves storm downward, yielding rich nectar, streaming,
concluding bath of the new and full moon sacrifices [3]. He goes to the bath along with the creatures
6 These Agnis in the seats of the fire nourish each thing most excellent.
13 He whom the sages, living men, have gladdened, offering up their hymns,
being performed, to prevent the infestation of the Raksases, for they do not move them, but they lie
thou mayest carry it: of these (the waters) thou shalt take such as are fit for sacrifice; having intelligently divided
8 Ye Lords of Splendour, free from guile, come, stand at this our sacrifice.
e Thou art easy of approach, first among leaders; the tree will mount thee, be aware of it.
new moon passes over the offering either at the new or the full moon; he wanders from the path on a
They shared the fulness of the earth, and won themselves extended sway.
1. Hither shall come the cattle which have strayed to a distance, whose companionship Vâyu (the wind) enjoys!
Thinking of whom, the poor, yea, even the mighty, even the King himself says, Give me Bhaga.
5 To waters with the stones they drive thee tawny-hued, most rich in sweets,
5 Tlirough various dwellings, through entire existence, spreads, manifest, the household light of Agni.
Accept, O Angiras, these our devotions, and let the praise which Gods desire address thee.
the redundancy; if he were not to appease it, the sacrificer would be ruined; 'May the two great ones, sky
2. However far he be, the red (steeds) shall urge hither Indra, the seer, to friendship, since the gods, (chanting) for
Puronuvakyas contain the word 'quarter', for the conquest of the quarters.
16 Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and look to thee,
ass lives all its days; therefore are men afraid when an ass perishes before its day. 'The strong, bearing
We invoke you to bless us with children and grand children.
1. Do ye agree, unite yourselves, may your minds be in harmony, just as the gods of old in harmony-. sat down to
Thereby it grew, it attained victoriousness and greatness. Those, who knowing thus perform (the rite of)
to the gods. 'Agni the Hotr' [4], he says; Agni is the Hotr of the gods; him he chooses who is the Hotr of
Indra raised his bolt, aided by Visnu. He said, 'Hurl it not at me; there is this [4] strength in me; I will
1. KINGS, Indra-Varuna, I would turn you hither to this our sacrifice with gifts and homage.
2 Based upon strength and victory and power, O Indra is thy birth:
So may that Indra, boundless, faithful Leader, conduct us o'er all places hard to traverse.
Having sacrificed with a verse addressed to Visnu, he approaches the post. The post has Visnu for its
4 Increasing by his strength. while lauds content him, with easy flight unto the Gods he travels.
1. SAVITAR, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright With the sunbeams, his eternal lustre;
The car that came with you brought splendid riches: a porpoise and a bull were yoked together.
3. Expressed by stones, O Soma, and urged through the long wool of the sheep, thou, entering the press-boards
Kindled, his radiant might is made apparent, and the great Deity set free from darkness.
That thou, O Lord of Power, dost slay Vritra with might
he bestows power upon himself. By three people is this to be performed, him who performs a year-long
Give food and wealth to present sacrificers, a portion, worth a thousand, of refreshment.
he makes him go to the world of' heaven. 'Join those in the seat', he says, for friendship. 'Given by us, go
says; right is men; verily to men he announces the sacrifice. 'Thou art following; for sky thee! Quicken
with its elements.' 'What by the sixth?' 'The six seasons.' 'What by the seventh?' 'The Çakvari with its
1. Ye by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, skilful, inviting Gods with sacrifices;
So may our songs of praise come nigh to Agni who was born to give the Arya strength!
Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light, produceth forms that please us.
10 Some, singing lauds, conceived the Sama-hymn, great hymn whereby they caused the Sun to
If I have lied or falsely sworn, Waters, remove it far from me.
Let us not pass away from light to exile. Scatter, that we may live, the men who hate us
8 When at the dawning of this mighty Goddess, Angirases all sang forth with the cattle,Their spring is in the loftiest place of meeting,-Sarama found the kine by Order's pathway.
2. Close to thy bosom am I. Soma, day and night draining the milk, O golden hued.
the drinking of Soma comes to him. In that it is dusky, verily he drives away the darkness from him. In
These in their altered form again thou meetest. Thou art Invoking Priest in homes of mortals.
verily they attain sovereignty. (These two) are overlords; verily they become overlords of their peers.
7 We give thee life unwasting, Jatavedas, so that, employed, thou never shalt be injured.
6 Help us, thou Brahman, best of all invokers of the Gods in song.
4. In victorious battles raise thy roar! What may be captured, capture; sound in many places! Favour, O drum, (our
Prajapati created offspring. On their creation Indra and Agni hid them away. Prajapati reflected, 'Indra
23 Burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood of Raksasas,
To thee the Friendly Courser, seen of all, comes speeding through the air.
should offer a barren cow to the plants, the plants hinder him from offspring who being fit for offspring
p O Agni, lord of vows, I have performed my vow; for that I have had strength; that hath been
12 May we, be yours, we men, to entertain the Gods: further our sacrifice and give it full success.
12 For us thou winnest, Agni, God, heroic strength exceeding great,
the world of heaven. Soma could not bear being drawn for women; making the ghee a bolt they beat it,
For man the days' bright ensign he illumined, and found the light for his joy and gladness.
5 Agni and Soma, joined in operation ye have set up the shining lights in heaven.
4 He like a falcon settles down amid the families of men.
4 Yea,Indra, with the men, through love of gloryconsumes the sacred food which friends have offered.
1. For food, flow onward with thy stream, cleansed and made bright by sapient men:
3 O Indu, Soma, send us now great opulence from every side, Pour on us treasures thousandfold.
11 Thy Steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse and Sama-hymn:
the seasons are six; verily he finds support in the seasons. (He should cut one) of seven cubits for one
Well he distinguished his two different voices, and Indra then advanced to fight the Dasyu.
4 Agni the God was made the great High-Priest of Gods, Rsis have kindled Agni, men of mortal mould.
to be produced', they say. He lets the calf go free and puts the pot on the fire: he puts down (the rice),
seasons; enclosing with the year; unassailable through penance; the sun with bodies.
Yielding in every house his seven rich treasures, Agni is seated, Priest most skilled in worship.
5 Come quickly to our laud, urged on by Soma-pressers like a horseLaud, Godlike Indra, which milch-kine make sweet for thee: with Kanva's sons are gifts for thee.
2 He whose two Bay Steeds harnessed well, swerving, pursue the Bird's tail-plumes,
e Thou art the past, the future by name, in the lordship of the Pitrs, expugnate the waters and the plants.
And that all in this village be prosperous [1] and free from ill.
born; if he should pile (it) in the sky, he would afflict the sky with pain, Parjanya would not rain. He
1. Pressed is the juice divine with milk commingled: thereto hath Indra ever been accustomed.
When in his arms they laid the bolt, he slaughtered the Dasyus and cast down their forts of iron.
8 Refresh thee, Hero, with the juice outpoured for bounty and for strength.
1. To Visnu, to the Mighty whom the Maruts follow let your hymns born in song go forth, Evayamarut;
the black antelope skin; verily to him these worlds become dear and desired.
3 On wood supine they got the well-formed Infant: a germ in various-fashioned plants was Agni;
Decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses out, when ye, Self. luminous, stirred
prospers, his foe is defeated. He divides five times; for five times did they divide. Then again the Pankti
13 O Dawn enriched with ample wealth, bestow on us the wondrous gift
Each God to bring you help, each God to strengthen you.
To be invoked in shallow waters and in depths, to be invoked in deeds of might.
b O bounteous one, restrain (it), protect Soma, guard wealth, win food by sacrifice, I place within thee
g I hail the dear names [1] of yon impetuous ones,
was its chosen boon. He measures (it) round with the yoke-pin [1], that is its measure; verily also by
away in the waters: that, O ye waters, furnish ye as a remedy!
it not at me; there is this strength in me, that will I bestow on thee'; on him he bestowed the Ukthya. At
past; in that he measures in silence, the future. Now if there were only so much Soma as that which he
15 That, Satakratu, thou to grace and please thy praisers, as it were,
14 Ye, ever-youthful Ones, again remembered Tugra, according to your ancient manner:
Let thy Bay Steeds, thy Stallions, hasten hither, with whom thou cornest nigh and art delighted.
4 Let them go forth, the strong, as flames of fire with might. Gathered for victory they have yoked their
In many a place did he deposit the germ of the waters.
8 Like rival wives on every side enclosing ribs oppress me sore.
there is one time unpropitious for sacrifice to the gods, when a cloud appears when it has been offered
Lord of all boons, thou art the Potar, passing wise. Pay worship, and enjoy the good!
4 Help us, O Indra, in the frays, yea, frays, where thousand spoils are gained,
e I sprinkle you agreeable to Agni, to Agni and Soma.
Have not the sages of old time, ye Asvins, called you most prompt to come and stay misfortune?
6 He is the Lord of both these armies' valour when the commanders call them to the conflict:
There is a Caturvinça. Twenty-four half-months make up the year, the year is the world of heaven;
20 This juice bruised by the pressing-stones and lauded passes through the sieve,
5 Come; man is pious and would fain do worship, he waits prepared: in gloom thou, Agni, dwellest.
3 Lord of all life, from near; from far, do thou, O Agni evermore
caused the clouds to mass together; with 'Utter' they begat [3] the lightning; with 'We that do sacrifice'
2. Both Kings who never injure aught have come to their sublimest home,
ashes; therefore the bones are clothed with flesh. He covers it with the bunch of grass; therefore [4] the
That the great Cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring a thousand streams, give milk to feed us.
5 When with wise plan the Hero leads the people forth, they conquer in the ordered battle, seeking
Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of Surya, and reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.
understands the expression to mean the two forms or essences of Soma, the celestial and the
Who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth encompassed with far-spreading lustre.
verily he is born. It is also as when one uncovers to a superior. The Angirases going to the world of
Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; verily he eats what the year has made sweet; those two do not wipe (their
goddesses', he says, for he moves forward along the quarters. 'Driving away poverty and hostility', he
Protect, ye Twain, the singer of your praises: to you, Nasatyas, is my wish directed.
16 When amid men in altered shape I sojourned, and through four autumns spent the nights among
Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening cloud of dust arose.
us', he says; strength is food, the Maruts are food; verily he wins food. 'In the stone is thy hunger; let thy
brilliance. There is an Ukthya, with the Pañcadaça (Stoma), and verses addressed to Indra; verily he
9 To Indra and to Varuna, desirous of gaining wealth have these my thoughts proceeded.
and himself for three generations have not drunk Soma should offer (a bull) which has again been let
3. He with his blazing Power refulgent far and wide, he verily it iswho conquers demon foes, conquers
4. Reverence be to thy ploughs, reverence to thy wagon-poles and yokes! May the plant, destructive of kshetriya,
b Ye are water; may I share your water. Ye are greatness, may I share your greatness; ye are might, may
7 With the Gods' help, with Indra still beside us, may we be held self-splendid with the Maruts.
6 Swell, O thou Bull and give those powers an impulse, e'en Earth and Heaven who yield their milk in
verily he wins food together with its place of birth. He should pile one that has to be collected together,
2. We will bring fuel and prepare our sacred gifts, reminding thee at each successive holy time.
Thy glories, meet for praise! are highest by the juice, O Indra, lover of the song.
The Vedas contain 100,000 mantras, describing varieties of rituals, practices, prayers, ceremonies, and gems of knowledge. All these are given with only one aim—to help unite the soul with God.vāsudeva-parā vedā vāsudeva-parā makhāḥvāsudeva-parā yogā vāsudeva-parāḥ kriyāḥvāsudeva-paraṁ jñānaṁ vāsudeva-paraṁ tapaḥvāsudeva-paro dharmo vāsudeva-parā gatiḥ (Bhāgavatam 1.2.28-29) [v38]“The goal of all the Vedic mantras, the ritualistic activities, spiritual practices, sacrifices, cultivation of knowledge, and performance of duties, is to help the soul reach the divine feet of God.”However, just as a medicine pill is often sugar-coated to make it more palatable, similarly to attract materially-minded people, the Vedas also give material allurements. The underlying motive is to help the soul gradually get detached from the world and attached to God. Thus, one who is attaching the mind to God is automatically fulfilling the purpose of all the Vedic mantras. Shree Krishna advises Uddhav:ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣhān mayādiṣhṭān api swakāndharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān māṁ bhajeta sa sattamaḥ (Bhāgavatam 11.11.32)[v39]“The Vedas prescribe varieties of social and ritualistic duties for individuals. But those who grasp their underlying motive, and rejecting all intermediate instructions, wholeheartedly fulfill their duty toward me, I consider them to be the highest devotees.”
9 With humble adoration show this day your song of praise to mighty Rudra, Ruler of the brave:
he becomes possessed of food, an eater of food. To Sarasvati should he offer it who [3], being able to
8 In his own house he dwells in peace and comfort: to him for ever holy food flows richly.
20 He cast down Arbuda what time his vigour was strengthened by libations poured by Trta.
6 They slay our Arya foes, these Lords of heroes, slay our Dasyu foes
Agni did fasten on; that yields him ghee more and more day after day: with it those that hate me do thou slay!
dear home of Agni; verily he unites him with his dear abode, and with brilliance also [5]. He puts on (a
4. To thee, illuminer of night, O Agni, day by day with prayer,
3 When Varuna and I embark together and urge our boat into the midst of ocean,
And far and wide shines out thy flame, and flickers rapidly moving over earth's high ridges.
The Plants have driven from the frame whatever malady was there.
is being recited the sun becomes not visible; he should offer to Surya (a beast) of many forms; verily he
3 Cheer us the Roamer round, who strikes at morning, the Wind delight us, pourer forth of waters!
6 Having no eldest and no youngest in their band, no middlomost, preeminent they have waxed in
5 Brilliant, and awful in their form, mighty, devourers of their foes':
3 What make ye there, ye Mighty? Wherefore linger ye with folk who, offering not, are held in high
1. Urged by the men, this vigorous steed, Lord of the mind omniscient,
9 As maidens dock themselves with gay adornment to join the bridal feast, I now behold them.
Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel filled brimful with treasure.
3 Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymns are pressing nigh to Soma.
He who sends forth,, Eternal Purifier, hath shattered e'en the ancient works of Asna.
5 As ever- conquering Agni's beams of splendour go to every side,
Then they, ancient and young, who dwell together, Seven sounding Rivers, as one germ received him.
For he is Bhaga, King, the earth's Protector. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
3 He with his shining glory blazing far and wide, he verily it is who slayeth demon foes, slayeth the
We sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises: thou filledst heaven and earth, God meet for
Invite ye the Immortal hither with your hymns. A God among the Gods, he loveth what is choice, loveth
19 When, true to duty, at due times the worshipper offers lauds to thee,
20 Indu, the living men milk out the juice to make the rapturous draught:
Even there may Brahmanaspati, may Aditi protect us well, protect us well through all our days!
There where the heroes speed hither and thither, there may the Arrows shelter and protect us.
Having embraced worshippers of all His various manifestations into the fold, Shree Krishna again reiterates His preference for the worship of the personal form. He surmises the worship of the impersonal Brahman by saying that it is an exceedingly challenging path that is full of tribulations.Why is the worship of the formless Brahman so difficult? The first and foremost reason for this is that we humans possess a form ourselves and we have been habituated to interacting with forms in endless lifetimes. Thus, while striving to love God as well, if our mind has a wonderful enchanting form to meditate upon, it can easily focus upon it and increase its attachment to the Lord. However, in the case of the formless, the intellect cannot conceive of it, and the mind and senses have no tangible object to relate to. So both the endeavors of meditating on God and increasing the mind’s attachment to Him become difficult.Worship of Brahman is also difficult in comparison to that of Bhagavān for another reason. The difference in paths can be understood through the markaṭ-kiśhore nyāya (the logic of the baby) monkey, and mārjār-kiśhore nyāya (the logic of the baby kitten). The baby monkey is responsible for holding onto her mother’s stomach; it is not helped by its mother. When the mother monkey jumps from one branch to another, the onus of clinging tightly onto the mother is upon the baby, and if it is unable to do so, it falls. In contrast, a kitten is very small and delicate, but the mother takes the responsibility of transporting it from one place to another, by holding the kitten from behind the neck and lifting it up. In the analogy, the devotees of the formless can be compared to the baby monkey and the devotees of the personal form can be compared to the baby kitten. Those who worship the formless Brahman have the onus of progressing on the path by themselves, because Brahman does not bestow grace upon them. Brahman is not only formless, It is also without attributes. It has been described as nirguṇa (without qualities), nirviśheṣh (without attributes), and nirākār (without form). From this, it follows that Brahman does not manifest the quality of grace. The jñānīs who worship God as nirguṇa, nirviśheṣh, and nirākār, have to rely entirely upon self-effort for progress. On the other hand, the personal form of God is an ocean of compassion and mercy. Hence, devotees of the personal form receive the help of divine support in their sādhanā. On the basis of the protection that God bestows upon His devotees, Shree Krishna stated in verse 9.31: “O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that no devotee of Mine is ever lost.” He confirms the same statement in the next two verses.
the wrath of the mighty (Varuna), do I, excelling in my incantation, lead out this man.
to the gods his oblation. If he desire of a man [1], 'May he become worse', he should offer each
2 Do ye, O Indra-Agni, hear the singer's call: accept his songs.
1. What, Vishnu, is the name that thou proclaimest when thou declaredst, I am Sipivishta?
2 For worthy of obeisance, Gods, are all your names, worthy of adoration and of sacrifice.
2. He whom our Indra and the Marut host shall drink, Bhaga shall drink with Aryaman,
6 For Saptavadhri, for the seer affrighted when he wept and wafled,
Give Bharadvaja hero patrons, Indra Indra, be ours upon the day of trial.
He makes a hall with beams pointing east. The gods and men divided the quarters, the gods (obtained)
produces offspring for him. There is one for the All-gods; offspring are connected with the All-gods;
2. This herb, born of honey, dripping honey, sweet as honey, honied, is the remedy for injuries; moreover it
6 Because the Father hath produced thee, Leader of all our solemn rites, their brilliant Banner:
3 Imperial Kings, strong, Heroes, Lords of earth and heaven, Mitra and Varuna, ye ever active Ones,
making this a brick he sets it down to prevent excessive burning. Prajapati desired, 'Let me be
oblation, he inserts the two eyes of the sacrifice. He offers in the front place; therefore the eyes are in
This Agni guards with care that never ceases the Sonia's skin, the Bird's place rich in fatness.
2 For thou hast ever been the Car-driver, Agni, of noble
the deity. He falls not a victim to the deities; he becomes richer. This is the dividing of the sacrificial
9 Indra and Agni, in your deeds of might ye deck heaven's lucid realms:
The twenty-four elements that constitute the field of activities are: pañcha-mahābhūta (the five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air, and space), the pañch-tanmātrās (five sense objects—taste, touch, smell, sight, and sound), the five working senses (voice, hands, legs, genitals, and anus), the five knowledge senses (ears, eyes, tongue, skin, and nose), mind, intellect, ego, and prakṛiti (the primordial form of the material energy). Shree Krishna uses the word daśhaikaṁ (ten plus one) to indicate the eleven senses. In these, He includes the mind along with the five knowledge senses and the five working senses. Previously, in verse 10.22, He had mentioned that amongst the senses He is the mind.One may wonder why the five sense objects have been included in the field of activities, when they exist outside the body. The reason is that the mind contemplates upon the sense objects, and these five sense objects reside in a subtle form in the mind. That is why, while sleeping, when we dream with our mind, in our dream state we see, hear, feel, taste, and smell, even though our gross senses are resting on the bed. This illustrates that the gross objects of the senses also exist mentally in the subtle form. Shree Krishna has included them here because He is referring to the entire field of activity for the soul. Some other scriptures exclude the five sense objects while describing the body. Instead, they include the five prāṇas (life-airs). This is merely a matter of classification and not a philosophical difference.The same knowledge is also explained in terms of sheaths. The field of the body has five kośhas (sheaths) that cover the soul that is ensconced within:Annamaya kośh. It is the gross sheath, consisting of the five gross elements (earth, water, fire, air, and space).Prāṇamaya kośh. It is the life-airs sheath, consisting of the five life airs (prāṇ, apān, vyān, samān, and udān).Manomaya kośh. It is the mental sheath, consisting of the mind and the five working senses (voice, hands, legs, genitals, and anus).Vijñānamaya kośh. It is the intellectual sheath, consisting of the intellect and the five knowledge senses (ears, eyes, tongue, skin, and nose).Ānandmaya kośh. It is the bliss sheath, which consists of the ego that makes us identify with the tiny bliss of the body-mind-intellect mechanism.
2 Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men's Conqueror, bounteous like a cow;
1.2.30 Mantra 30 – Indra and Others (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada
10 On Pedu ye bestowed, Asvins, a courser white, mighty with nine-and-ninety varied gifts of strength,
4 With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds: Indra throws drops of moisture on his yellow
the burial-ground, or if with superior skill they have practised sorcery against thee, that art simple and innocent, in
They neither rejoice in mundane pleasures nor despair in worldly sorrows. If we are in the dark and someone offers help by showing a lamp, we naturally rejoice. Then, if someone blows out the flame, we feel annoyed. But if we are standing under the noonday sun, we feel indifferent whether someone shows us a lamp or another blows it out. Similarly, the devotees of the Lord, being gratified with the divine love bliss of the God, rise above pleasure and despair.Neither lament for any loss nor hanker for any gain. Such devotees neither hanker after pleasant worldly situations nor grieve in unpleasant ones. The Nārad Bhakti Darśhan states:yatprāpya na kiñchidvāñchhati, na śhochati, na dveṣhṭi, na ramate, notsāhi bhavati (Sūtra 5)“On attaining divine love for God, the devotees neither yearn for pleasant things nor grieve on losing them. They are not hateful of those who harm them. They have no liking for worldly enjoyments. They are not anxious for the enhancement of their worldly position.” Devotees relish the bliss of God, so the bliss of all material objects seems insignificant in comparison.Renounce both good and evil actions. Devotees obviously renounce evil actions (vikarm), for they are against their nature and displeasing to God. The good actions Shree Krishna refers to are prescribed ritualistic duties (karm) mentioned in the scriptures. All actions performed by the devotees become akarm (inaction) because they are not performed with any selfish motive and are dedicated to God. The concept of akarm has been explained in great detail in verses 4.17to 4.20.Full of devotion. Bhaktimān means “filled with devotion.” The nature of divine love is such that it keeps increasing for eternity. Bhakti poets have said: prem meñ pūrṇimā nahīñ “Unlike the moon which waxes to a limit and then wanes, divine love keeps growing without limit.” So, the heart of the devotee contains an ocean of love for God. Shree Krishna says that such devotees are very dear to Him.
1. IF I, O Indra, were, like thee, the single Sovran of all wealth,
1. As 'twere with swift exertion of the spirit, let the priest speed to the celestial Waters,
we set out?' he says; there indeed is the sacrifice placed [1], where the Brahman is; where the sacrifice is
seeds, Soma is it [7]; verily straightway he wins Soma drinking. He who desires cattle should offer a
5 On this great earth ye send your treasure down with might: unstained by dust, the crowding kine are
place he should stroke with this formula; verily he appropriates the force, might, power, strength,
Draw nigh then to the gracious-minded Fathers where they rejoice in company with Yama.
2.5.5.6 Mantra 6: The Form of the Days and Space-filler Bricks
Gods! Maruts! Brahmanaspati! I crave with song the help that is most excellent.
of heaven. One should not follow the other; if one were to follow the other, season would follow season,
A Steer that o'er the woolly surface seeks the sieve, Soma while purified for Indra's nourishment.
the kindling-stick with the verse, the piler-up of the fire milks the fire. 'Seven are thy kindling-sticks, O
3 O Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine:
2. Sages have called to Indra, like cows, milch-kine, lowing to their calves,
May they bring hither hundreds, thousands for our men: may they bring hidden stores to light, and
4 With Gods come thou whose fostering care none checks, O Goddesss Aditi:
So Indra forced the Engulfer to disgorgement, and slew the Danava. panting against him.
60. She whom Visvakarman (the creator of all) did search out by means of oblations, when she had entered the
3. The waters verily are healing, the waters chase away disease, the waters cure all (disease): may they prepare
By special grace, Arjun has been shown the cosmic form that is not easily seen by anyone. Arjun has realized that Shree Krishna is much more than merely his friend. His divine personality encompasses unlimited universes. Yet, he is not attracted by the infinite opulences and is not interested in doing aiśhwarya bhakti of God Almighty. Rather, he prefers seeing that Almighty Lord in the human form, so that he can relate to him as before, like a friend. Addressing Lord Krishna as sahasra-bāho, meaning “thousand-armed one,” Arjuna is now specifically requesting to see the chatur-bhuj rūp, or four- armed form of Lord Krishna.In the four-armed form, Shree Krishna appeared before Arjun on another occasion as well. When Arjun tied Ashwatthama, the killer of the five sons of Draupadi and brought him before her, at that time Shree Krishna revealed himself in his four-armed form.niśhamya bhīma-gaditaṁ draupadyāśh cha chatur-bhujaḥālokya vadanaṁ sakhyur idam āha hasanniva (Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam 1.7.52)[v23]“The four-armed Shree Krishna heard the statements of Bheem, Draupadi, and others. Then he looked toward his dear friend Arjun and began smiling.” By requesting Shree Krishna to manifest in his four-armed form, Arjun is also confirming that the four-armed form of the Lord is non-different from his two-armed form.
The year is the year, the Ayavas are the months, the red one the dawn, the steed Surya, the Açvins these
cattle. Now they kill [1] the beast when they dispose of it; the expiration has Indra for its deity, the
31. She evolves it in her mind, that (thought) reaches the gods. Then do the Brahmans come to beg for the sterile
38 O Soma, thou beholdest men from every side: O Pavamana, Steer, thou wanderest through these.
Therewith the universe's Sovran waters earth as the shower of rain bedews the barley.
prosperity. By the Agnistut he burned away the evil, by (the rite) of fifteen nights he placed force, might,
For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee. Bring me whatever thing I ask.
Hymns follow and attend him as he bellows: Trita bears Varuna aloft in ocean.
4 Those who are yoked by prayer I harness, fleet friendly Bays who take their joy together.
n Hail! with my mind the sacrifice (I grasp); hail! from heaven and earth, bail! from the broad
Anent it the gods decreed: 'Powerful to secure life this (plant) shall be!'
Making loud clamour, Soma Pavamana, thou flowest when thou art effused for Indra.
1. A THOUSAND heads hath Purusa, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet.
indicate whomsoever he hates; whom he hates [4], him he indicates as a victim to it. If he hates not, 'The
all things are produced, thereby is this (earth) variegated (citra); he who knowing thus sacrifices with the
In whom, purifying, good things are placed, even as the heaven and earth (support) all beings.
4 Gods through thy glory, God who art so lovely! granting abundant gifts gained life immortal.
it I place thee along with the sacrificer', he says [1]; the world of Prajapati, named Vibhan, is this
offspring and cattle. These go imperfect to the world of heaven, for they resort to various Stomas; in that
Fearless, and conscious that his Steeds are noble, he joyeth with the Soma-pouring heroes.
(waters) [3], be would cause Varuna to seize his sacrifice. If it is done by day, the night enters the
9 Prani brought forth, to fight the mighty battle, the glittering army of the restless Maruts.
9 So in their work the Gods had satisfaction, pondering it with thought and mental insight.
man, who knows thus and for whom they chose his list of ancestors, prospers himself, his enemy is
3 Thee have we chosen skilftillest in sacrifice, Immortal Priest among the Gods,
The wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, and balm his form with essence of the waters.
(Brahman) of the gods; verily by the holy power (Brahman) he unites the sacrifice. 'May he unite this
3 These who delight in flowing juice, like fellow horses at their food,
19 May the Gods' envoy, sent to many a quarter, proclaim us sinless for our perfect safety.
Who hath become eight-footed or hath got nine feet, the thou sand-syllabled in the sublimest heaven.
We have received in turn from Divodasa Sambara's wealth, the gift of Atithigva.
In this chapter, Shree Krishna explained the categories of yajña (sacrifice), tapaḥ (austerity), and dān (charity), according to the three modes of material nature. Amongst these three modes, the mode of ignorance degrades the soul into nescience, languor, and sloth. The mode of passion excites the living being and binds it in innumerable desires. The mode of goodness is serene and illuminating, and engenders the development of virtues. Yet, the mode of goodness is also within the realm of Maya. We must not get attached to it; instead, we must use the mode of goodness as a stepping-stone to reach the transcendental platform. In this verse, Shree Krishna goes beyond the three guṇas, and discusses the words Om Tat Sat, which symbolize different aspects of the Absolute Truth. In the following verses, he explains the significance of these three words.
witchcraft; Rudra is his dread form; verily he cuts him down to him; swiftly he reaches misfortune. He
3. And Trita's maidens onward urge the tawny-coloured with the stones,
8. They that are the food of Agni (the fire), the offspring of the waters, that grow ever renewing themselves, the
Trvrsan's son Tryaruna hath distinguished himself, Vaisvanara Agni! with ten thousands.
7 Mortals with pious thought implore thee, Agni, God, at holy rites,
3. Dweller in floods, King, foremost, he displays his might, set among living things as measure of days.
10 When Gods immortal made both eyes of heaven, they gave to him the gift of beauteous glory.
quest. There is a Trayastrinça (Stoma), for support. They should sacrifice with this (rite) of six nights
inspiration, expiration and inspiration depart from him whose illness is long. Verily he has recourse to
without cattle', he should put down for him the strengthening (bricks) and then put down the water
1. Strong Indu, bathed in milk, flows on for Indra, Soma exciting strength, for his carousal.
He offers the Samistayajuses, for the completion of the sacrifice. Whatever is harsh or injured in the
3. From heaven her root is suspended, from the earth it rises up; with her that has a thousand shoots do thou
1. This divine tree, the varana, shall shut out (vârayâtai). The gods, too, have shut out (avîvaran) the disease that
Visnu, the trees are connected with Visnu; verily in the sacrifice he establishes the sacrifice.
2. Light, ye gods, shall be at his bidding: Sûrya (the sun), Agni (fire), or even gold! Inferior to us shall be our rivals!
18 Be helping Friend of those who seek thy friendship . give life, when lauded, Indra, to the singer.
The designations sthita prajña (one with steady intellect) and samādhi-stha (situated in trance) apply to enlightened persons. Having heard from Shree Krishna about the state of perfect yog, or Samādhi, Arjun asks a natural question. He wishes to know the nature of the mind of a person who is in this state. Additionally he wishes to know how this divine state of mind manifests in a person’s behavior.Beginning with this verse, Arjun asks Shree Krishna sixteen sets of questions. In response, Shree Krishna reveals the deepest secrets of karm yog, jñāna yog, bhakti yog, austerity, meditation, etc. The sixteen sets of questions asked by Arjun are:1. “What is the disposition of one who is situated in divine consciousness? (verse 2.54)2. “If you consider knowledge superior to fruitive works, then why do you ask me to wage this terrible war?” (verse 3.1)3. “Why is a person impelled to commit sinful acts, even unwillingly, as if by force?” (verse 3.36)4. “You were born much after Vivasvan. How am I to understand that in the beginning you instructed this science to him?” (verse 4.4)5. “You praised the path of renunciation of actions, and again you praised work with devotion. Please tell me decisively which of the two is more beneficial?” (verse 5.1)6. “O Krishna, the mind is very restless, turbulent, strong and obstinate. It appears to me that it is more difficult to control than the wind.” (verse 6.34)7. “What is the fate of the unsuccessful yogi who begins the path with faith, but whose mind deviates from God due to untamed passions, and is unable to reach the highest perfection in this life?” (verse 6.37)8. “What is Brahman and what is karma? What is Adhibhūta, and who are the Ādhidaiva? Who is Ādhiyajña and how does he dwell in this body? O slayer of the Madhu demon, how can those of steadfast mind be united with you at the time of death?” (verse 8.1-2)9. “Please describe to me your divine opulences, by which you pervade all the worlds.” (verse 10.16)10. “I long to see your cosmic form, O Supreme divine Personality.” (verse 11.3)11. “You, who existed before all creation, I wish to know who you are, for your nature and workings mystify me.” (verse 11.31)12. “Between those who are steadfastly devoted to your personal form and those who worship the formless Brahman, whom do you consider to be more perfect in Yog?” (verse 12.1)13. “I wish to know about Prakṛiti (Nature) and Puruśh (the enjoyer). What is the field of activities, and who is the knower of the field? What is the nature of knowledge, and the object of knowledge?” (verse 13.1)14. “What are the characteristics of those who have gone beyond the three guṇas, O Lord? How do they act? How have they passed beyond the bondage of the guṇas?” (verse 14.21)15. “Where do they stand who disregard the injunctions of the scriptures, but still worship with faith?” (verse 17.1)16. “I wish to understand the nature of sanyās (renunciation), and how it is distinct from tyāg, or renouncing the fruits of actions.” (verse 18.1)
form of draught; verily he pours upon it with the highest draught; (he pours) with a Yajus, for
All-lighting, radiant, mighty as the Sun to see, he spreadeth wide unshaken victory and strength.
12 Let us not here contend with Gods, O Indra, for here, O Mighty One, is thine own portion,
With eyes that close not, bellowing, Sole Hero, Indra. subdued at once a hundred armies.
The Rudras come with succour to the worshipper; self-strong they fail not him who offers sacrifice.
world of heaven, made over to the seers the accomplishment of the sacrifice; it became gold; in that he
eight the metres of men; verily he wins both the metres of gods and men. Up to thirty-three he offers; the
16 May plentiful libations of the people, and singing Rsis' holy prayers rejoice thee.
f May Tutha, all knowing, allot to you in the highest firmament.
8 May the prayerful couples be blessed with sons and daughters, and may such couples enjoy
on, for atonement. He puts down sand; that is the form of Agni Vaiçvanara; verily by his form he wins
All truly share thy Godhead while they keep, in their accustomed ways, eternal Law.
2 I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and Tvastar I support, Pusan, and Bhaga.
Thereto for his bright milk he milked through all the days the party-coloured Cow and the prolific Bull.
May he consign thee to these Fathers' keeping, and to the gracious Gods let Agni give thee.
1 O Soma, O thou Sage, these worlds stand ready to enhance thy might:
15 The poison-insect is so small; I crush the creature with a stone.
3 Friendship with Indra have the Rbhus, fully gained: grandsons of Manu, they skilfully urged the work.
8 He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who eyes a fish in scanty water.
3 May those first freshest drops of Soma juice effused flow on, their way to bring us mighty strength in
Jagati on the west, an Anustubh on the north, a Pankti in the middle; this is the fire with faces on all
three Upasads, these worlds are three; verily he delights these worlds; they together make six, the
Gaineth abundant wealth with sons and horses, with heroes and with kine for his well-being.
Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Angirases. Welcome the son of Manu, ye who are most wise.
half-month, the Pitrs in a month, trees in a year. Therefore day by day men desire food, at the halfmonth the gods are sacrificed to, every month offering is made to the Pitrs, in a year trees produce fruit.
lost what is lost; verily in them he finds it, (and it serves) for support.
May the Saptarshi (the 7 stars of the Great Bear constellation) breathe fearlessness into us.
Remover of the woe that Gods have sent us? O Strong One, look thou on me with compassion.
Bind to the pole, to draw, the fleet-foot tawny steeds, the best at drawing, to the pole.
So that this glorious fuel may send forth by day its light for thee. Bring food to those who sing thy
6 The man who sits, the man who walks, and whosoever looks on us,
High vital strength, and manifold, may he grant us. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
sacrifice he indicates it to the gods. The [5] sacrificial fee which he gives at the sacrifice his cattle
says thus. If the Adhvaryu were to offer a libation where there were no fire, the Adhvaryu would
22 The Soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at hand,
24 Come near with those most recent aids of yours which merit eulogy,
f Homage to him who haunteth the mountains, and to Çipivista.
May they come forward, through their spirit, on the path of bliss, in the wild joy of Soma juice effused.
Shrill be, the music of the string. To Indra. is the hymn up-raised.
with their own share; verily they [1] make Parjanya rain for him by day and night. To Agni, hiding his
Indra, approaching quickly, marked their going, and looked around upon the Sun's enclosures.
pegs to the kindling-wood; verily he attains what cannot be taken away. (The pegs) are of Açvattha
Here, Rudra, listen to our invocation. Loud may we speak, with heroes, in assembly.
5 He who serves thee with sacrifice and fuel, with hymn, O Son of Strength, and chanted praises,
6 Straightway the Rudras, Maruts visiting all men, Falcons of Dyaus, home-dwellers with the Asura,Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and the swift-moving Indra with swift-moving Gods.
5 O Indra-Varuna, the wickedness of foes and mine assailants' hatred sorely trouble me.
6 These are thy famous exploits, only thine, when thou alone hast left the other reft of sacrifice.
who is appropriated', he says; verily he makes breath his own; 'make our food full of sweetness for us',
1. Breath of the mighty Dames, the Child, speeding the plan of sacrifice,
Light is the task to give, O Maghavan, to one like me on the decisive day.
the active one gladly partake of the ghee', he says; verily he makes the sacrificer active and causes him
1. As the best of the plants thou art reputed, O herb: turn this man for me to-day into a eunuch that wears his hair
Brhaspati was the Purohita of the gods, Çanda and Marka of the Asuras; the gods had the holy power
He who practises witchcraft should offer to Agni and Visnu on eleven potsherds; Sarasvati should have
he bestows splendour on him [6]; he becomes resplendent. The bull grazes at will, splendour indeed is as
4 Loving us well, benevolent, close beside us, drink, Godlike Indra, of the wellpressed Soma.
with the vital airs, and end with the vital airs. Now offspring leave their vital airs in that the Vamadevya
8 I praise with eloquence him who guards all pathways. He, when his love impelled him, went to Arka.
10 How long a time, and they shall be together,-Dawns that have shone and Dawns to shine hereafter?
threefold', (with these words he puts down) on the west, for support. 'The vault, the thirty-sixfold', (with
begets him from his own womb; 'this is the fire', they say, I what falls from it is light'; in that he offers to
Following closely the Aditya's statute, may we remain in Mitra's gracious favour.
(offering) is on one potsherd, for he cannot obtain the animal (offering) by means of (many) potsherds.
strengthened by our charm, slay them: slay their (brood), O Agni, piercing them a hundredfold!
1. Bristle thou up, O Maghavan, our weapons: excite the spirits, of my warring heroes!
f Homage to the bolt-armed destructive ones, to the lord of pilferers homage!
ploughs) with the year. This (earth) was afraid of excessive burning by Agni; she saw this of two sorts,
So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who went not to prepare the grass for worship.
2 Thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer Vrtra, O Blameless One, with heart that longed
The Deities, the broad earth, and the heavens, and plants, and waters gloried in his friendship.
2.3.3.10 Mantra 10: The Expiation for the Slaughter of a Victim with Embryo
4 Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them,-each man who sees, brewhes, hears the word
'blowing after', the night; with eager', the Vasus; with 'intelligence', the Rudras; with 'brilliant', the
11 Incline thy body to this juice which suits thy Godlike nature well:
2. I make thee cling to my arm, cling to my heart, so that thou shalt be in my power, shalt come up to my wish!
5 Yea, here were they who, born of old, have served thee, thy friends of ancient time, thou active
glory of the sacrifice. 'By the Rc make the Stoma to flourish', he says [3], for prosperity. With four
He slew the Dragon, then disclosed the waters, and cleft the channels of the mountain torrents.
Thus were my forms laid down in many places. This, as my goal, I Agni saw before me.
2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harmless bird, ye Gods, within our dwelling.
They strengthened, loud in song, thy power that droppeth oil. With hymns the Pauras came to thee.
His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let us adore this Wind with our oblation.
Lord of the lovely look, all things belong to thee: ten, hundred, yea, a thousand are outweighed by thee.
those on the south Bharadvaja, with those on the west Viçvamitra, with those on the north Jamadagni,
1. With homage will I reverence thee, Agni, like a long-tailed steed,
6 I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater of devotion.
The union is milked for all desires; thus the sacrificers obtain all desires.
Rudras, Indra with the Maruts, Varuna with the Adityas, Brhaspati with the All-gods. They reflected,
Maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon, and smote to death this firstborn of the dragons.
And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee alone.
drive out, that which is in the limbs, and in the joints!
did Vayu make him sweet for him; therefore what becomes putrid they hang out in a windy place, for
are greatness. 'Ye are might; may I share your might', he says, for they are might. 'Ye are strength; may I
3. This one (Kaurama) presented the seer with a hundred jewels, ten chaplets, three hundred steeds, and ten
8. This great world was the net of great Sakra: with this net of Indra I infold all those (enemies) yonder in
9 We invocate thee first among the Deities: thou hast become a mighty Conquer in fight.
Impetuous-tongued, destroying, springing swiftly forth, one to be watched and cherished, strengthener
i May I be victorious through the victory of Indra [1].
birthplace of Indra; harm me not', (with these words) he hands the horn of the black antelope. Verily he
Indra is Master of the pair who snort and swerve upon their way.
20 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall conquer men,
8. Live thou by the (life's) breath of them that have life, and that create life; do not die! I free thee from all evil and
4.7.65 Sukta 65 – Charm with the Apamarga plant, against curses, and the consequences of
3 My Sons are slayers of the foe, my Daughter is a ruling Queen:
1. WITH songs of praise we call on thee, we kindle thee with songs of praise,
Men in the house who share the sacred banquet stand singing praise that brings them store of children.
contains the word 'head'; verily he makes him head of his peers [2]. He offers with averse containing the
Thou, Maghavan, for all his might and swiftness, slewest thy fighting foeman with thy thunder
22 Indu to Indra streams, yea, downward streams, Strong, flowing to the floods, and mingling -there.
Wide is his dwelling. May the noble offipring of Nahusa who wandered forth come hither.
5 No sorrow, no distress from any side, no foes, no creatures double-tongued have overcome the
Hymns have been sung aloud in resonant harmony, and holy songs kiss him, the Child who claims our
We know thee Lord of ample store, to thee have sent our hearts' desires: be therefore our Protector
Cooked foods that have remained for more than one yām (three hours) are classified in the mode of ignorance. Foods that are impure, have bad taste, or possess foul smells come in the same category. Impure foods also include all kinds of meat products. Nature has designed the human body to be vegetarian. Human beings do not have long canine teeth as carnivorous animals do, or a wide jaw suitable for tearing flesh. Carnivores have short bowels to allow minimal transit time for the unstable and dead animal food, which putrefies and decays faster. On the contrary, humans have a longer digestive tract for the slow and better absorption of plant food. The stomach of carnivores is more acidic than human beings, which enables them to digest raw meat. Interestingly, the carnivorous animals do not sweat through their pores. Rather, they regulate body temperature through their tongue. On the other hand, herbivorous animals and humans control bodily temperature by sweating through their skin. While drinking, carnivores lap up water rather than suck it. In contrast, herbivores do not lap up water; they suck it. Humans too suck water while drinking; they do not lap it up. All these physical characteristics of the human body reveal that God has not created us as carnivorous creatures, and consequently, meat is considered impure food for humans.Meat-eating also creates bad karma. The Manu Smṛiti states:māṁ sa bhakṣhayitā 'mutra yasya māṁsam ihādmy ahametan māṁsasya māṁsatvaṁ pravadanti manīṣhiṇaḥ (5.55)[v2]“The word mānsa (meat) means “that whom I am eating here will eat me in my next life.” For this reason, the learned say that meat is called mānsa (a repeated act: I eat him, he eats me).”
May we, Adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that which shall bring us greater bliss.
The chief, the longing ones have sought to hold thee fast, and all these living creatures have been
1. GREAT Indra will I laud, in whom all people who drink the Soma have attained their longing;
In the abode of earth, I dig Agni of the dust in the manner of Angiras.
Yog means “union,” and buddhi yog means “having the intellect united with God.” This union of the intellect occurs when it is firmly convinced that everything in existence has emanated from God, is connected to him, and is meant for his satisfaction. Let us understand the position of the intellect in our internal system.Within our body is the subtle antaḥ karaṇ, which we also refer to colloquially as the heart, or the etheric heart. It has four aspects to it. When it creates thoughts, we call it mana, or mind. When it analyses and decides, we call it buddhi, or intellect. When it gets attached to an object or person, we call it chitta. When it identifies with the attributes of the body and becomes proud, we call it ahankār, or ego.In this internal machinery, the position of the intellect is dominant. It makes decision, while the mind desires in accordance with those decisions, and the chitta gets attached to the objects of affection. For example, if the intellect decides that security is the most important thing in the world, then the mind always yearns for security in life. Throughout the day, we humans control our mind with the intellect. That is why anger flows downward. The CEO shouts at the director. The director does not shout back, because the intellect realizes that it will cost him the job; he vents his anger at the manager. The manager controls himself, despite feeling vexed with the director; but finds release by shouting at the foreman. The foreman takes it all out at the worker. The worker purges his frustration on the wife. The wife shouts at the children. In each case, the intellect decides where it is dangerous to get angry, and where it does not have repercussions. The example illustrates that as human beings our intellect possesses the ability to control the mind.Thus, we must cultivate the intellect with proper knowledge and use it to guide the mind in the proper direction. This is what Shree Krishna means by buddhi yog—developing a resolute decision of the intellect that all work and all things are meant for the pleasure of God. For such a person of resolute intellect, the chitta easily gets attached to God.
o Ye are sharers in the remains (of the oblation), well nourished, mighty
1. I think of Agni who is kind, whom, as their home, the milch-kine seek;
should offer a brown (beast) to Soma; food is connected with Soma; verily he has recourse to Soma with
Strong, glorious, manliest, for us he shattered the forts of Nabus when he slew the Dasyus.
verse with the word 'imperishable'; verily by it he causes his enemy to perish [5]. 'The flaming locked,
One carries off the refuse at the set of sun. How did the Parents aid their children in their task!
9 At the o'erflowing of this Steer, boldly he strode for life, and took
breath shall be to our friend; thee, O Parameshthin, I envelop in life and lustre.
Savitar, God, hath sentus forth to labour, each quadruped, each biped, to be active.
wish, 'May it be in my deities.' He who knows the lowest of the Stomas attaining the first place, obtains
I. They have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky the old divine primeval milk that claims
does not turn (it) round; if he were to turn (it) round, disease would be likely to seize his offspring. 'Go
27 He who alone by wondrous deed is Mighty, Strong by holy works,
Like castles thou hast crushed the godless races, and bowed the godless scorner's deadly weapon.
4 This Varuna is guide of Law, he, Mitra, and Aryaman, the Kings, our work have finished.
verily with them he goes for them. 'O ye divine waters, child of the water', he says; verily by the oblation
Vastospati; verily with his own share he appeases him; the sacrificer does not come to ruin. If he were to
1. ENDOWED, O Gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quickly with your chariot, O ye Holy.
He gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, when through their glory they-found the God's
16 Now have we entered on the road that leads to bliss, without a foe,
The fire is piled for the world of heaven [2]; (with the words) With the light wherewith the gods went
(Brahman); for the world of heaven is as it were opposite from hence. When they come thence the
10 Such zeal hath he, resistless one: he gained the cattle given by thee.
In thee, through thy great might, the Gods are joyful: the roots of trees hast thou directed upward.
Borne on firm chariot with the prosperous Nahup, wise, to a man yet more devout.
together the shoulders (of the fire). 'The tiger in strength', (with these words) he puts down in the right
The Dragon lies beneath the feet of torrents which Vrtra with his greatness had encompassed.
sacrifice. The first he draws, by this he conquers the world; the second (he draws), by this he conquers
2 May Agni, the divine Priest who is glorified by both the past and the present sages,
9 Among all Rsis, Indra, old and recent, who have engendered hymns as sacred singers,
14 The Anavas and Druhyus, seeking booty, have slept, the sixty hundred, yea, six thousand,
May they disclose to us great store of treasure, much-longed for, rich in food, source of enjoyment.
11 The waters flowed according to their nature; he raid the navigable streams waxed mighty.
Pour down upon Praskanva bounty vast and firm, exuberant, that shall never fail.
7 Various pools of water may look alike, but some may be knee-deep and others may be much deeper.
Yatis to the Salavrkas; them they ate on the right of the high altar. Whatever is left of the sprinkling
is a Prsthya Sadaha. The seasons are six, the Prsthas are six; verily by the Prsthas they reach the seasons,
1. For thou art strong by splendour: we, O Pavamana call on thee,
support in the fire which he has piled. He who first piles (the fire) should pile in five layers; the sacrifice
with them do they proceed; verily also in them they find support. These indeed are the quick paths of the
7 When as chief priest for Santanu, Devapi, chosen for Hotar's duty, prayed beseeching,
7 Indra, do thou protect our car that mingles foremost in the fights,
6. The plants givalâ ('quickening'), na-ghâ-rishâ ('forsooth-no-harm'), gîvanti ('living'), and the arundhatî, which
3 Agni, I offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy moutlh.
1. INDRA, for our assistance bring that most effectual power of thine,
for the Maruts; the mixed one for Indra and Agni; the one spotted below for Savitr; the ram for Varuna.
There are some yogis who follow the path of discrimination, or jñāna yog, and take the help of knowledge to withdraw their senses from the world. While haṭha yogis strive to restrain the senses with brute will-power, jñāna yogis accomplish the same goal with the repeated practice of discrimination based on knowledge. They engage in deep contemplation upon the illusory nature of the world, and the identity of the self as distinct from the body, mind, intellect, and ego. The senses are withdrawn from the world, and the mind is engaged in meditation upon the self. The goal is to become practically situated in self-knowledge, in the assumption that the self is identical with the Supreme Ultimate reality. As aids to contemplation, they chant aphorisms such as: tattvamasi “I am That,” (Chhāndogya Upaniṣhad 6.8.7)[v21] and ahaṁ brahmāsmi “I am the Supreme Entity.” (Bṛihadāraṇyak Upaniṣhad 1.4.10) [v22] The practice of jñāna yog is a very difficult path, which requires a very determined and trained intellect. The Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam (11.20.7) states: nirviṇṇānāṁ jñānayogaḥ [v23] “Success in the practice of jñāna yog is only possible for those who are at an advanced stage of renunciation.”
Bearing it to her home she said, For Indra will I press thee out, for Sakra will I press thee out.
6 For Indra, for the Thunderer press the Soma very rich in sweets,
3. Then straight they recognized the mystic name of the creative Steer.
6 Excellent is the glance, of brightest splendour, which the auspicious God bestows on mortalsThe God's glance, longed-for even as the butter, pure, heated, of the cow, the milch-cow's bounty.
57. Thou that passest across me, casting thy shadow against me, between me and the fire--of thee do I tear out
O Vrtra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink of the Soma juice, thou blameless Thunderer.
a To the purpose, to the impulse, to Agni, hail! To wisdom, to thought, to Agni, hail! To consecration, to
10 Ye from the old Cyavana, O Nasatyas, stripped, as 'twere mail, the skin upon
May we be glorious among the people. May Heaven vouchsafe us this, and Earth the Goddess,
4.6.102Sukta 102 – Charm to secure the love of a Woman
n To him that sitteth in man, hail! [3] To him that sitteth in the waters, hail! To him that sitteth in the
Thou farest as an envoy, having harnessed, Sublime One! thy strong-muscled radiant stallions.
The chariot of the gods is yoked for the world of heaven, the chariot of man for wherever his intention is
3 Come, thou Impetuous; God, from earth or heaven; come to our holy grass to drink the Soma.
and strength, verily Pusan [4] he has recourse to with his own share; verily he gives to him power and
Adityas, giving prosperity, with their own share; verily they make him attain prosperity; he becomes
A second time they wax and gather Godlike power, and blending both together change their Parents'
were not to descend to this world [3], the sacrificers would either go mad or perish. In that the Prsthas
4 To Indra, even as rivers to the ocean, flow forth from days of old the Soma juices;
If a warrior chooses to become non-violent on the battlefield, it will be dereliction of duty, and hence, classified as a sinful act. Hence, Shree Krishna states that if Arjun abandons his duty, considering it to be repugnant and troublesome, he will be committing a sin. The Parāśhar Smṛiti states:kṣhatriyoḥ hi prajā rakṣhañśhastrapāṇiḥ pradaṇḍavānnirjitya parasainyādi kṣhitiṁ dharmeṇa pālayet (1.61) [v33]“The occupational duty of a warrior is to protect the citizens of the country from oppression. This requires the application of violence in appropriate cases for the maintenance of law and order. He should thus defeat the soldiers of enemy kings, and help rule the country according to the principles of righteousness.”
5 As conscious that her limbs are bright with bathing, she stands, as 'twere, erect that we may see her.
14 Whether, Nasatyas, ye be nigh, or whether ye be far away,
18 By this our prayer be thou, O Agni, strengthened, prayer made by us after our power and
the latter two milkings; how then can she be milked who is twelve times milked?' Having made up the
power (Brahman) of the gods; verily with the holy power (Brahman) he practises against him [1]. Him
6 He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd of men,Physician is that sage's name, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease.
2 What time the Maruts sang their song to Indra, joyous when he had drunk of Soma juices,
4. This amulet has a golden wreath, bestows faith and sacrifice and might; in our house as a guest it shall dwell!
i Go ye on by the path of holy order, of brilliant gifts,
they drew it when it had lost its power; therefore women are powerless, have no inheritance, and speak
7 O Lord, the remover of darkness! We pray to you morning and evening
42. The treasurer shall fetch this treasure: all outsiders round about shall not control it! The heaven-directed
3 Yea, the broad waters swell their flood ior him: of him strong heroes think amid their foes.
3 He with his folk, his house, his family, his sons, gains booty for himself, and, with the heroes,
To you they bring their hymns with their collected thought, while ye with earnest soul come to us
Food to your praisers, to your bard in deeds of might give winning wisdom, power uninjured,
8. Sprung in the north from the Himavant (mountains), thou art brought to the people in the east. There the most
the day is connected with Mitra, the night with Varuna; by day and night indeed offspring are born;
curds, curds are cattle, the Udumbara is strength; verily he confers strength upon cattle. He puts (them)
2 The Dames of Trita with the stones onward impel this Tawny One
11 Be this my prayer fulfilled, O Earth and Heaven, wherewith, Father and Mother, I address you.
sings nine (verses). Nine are the breaths in man; verily he places breaths in the sacrificers. All of them
6. Him, here, the gold-decked skilful ten cleanse carefully, who make him bright.
5 When heroes sang their laud to thee the Hero, Indra! and stones and Aditi accordant,
Onward hath Soma passed through the sheep's fair bright fleece, and hath, as 'twere, endued a
4 O Vrtra-slayer, be thou pleased with these libations, with these hymns,
4 May Agni, foe-destroyer, manliest Hero, accept with love our hymns and our devotion.
'Thee for the light of holy order', he says; the light of holy order is the world of heaven; verily he
i Homage to him of the dry, and to him of the green.
1. As, like the Morning, thou has filled, O Indra, both the earth and heaven,
syllables won the Tristubh; the All-gods with twelve syllables won the Jagati; the Vasus with thirteen
That splendid gift which is thine own, O Indra, vouchsafe to us, Lord of the Tawny Coursers.
others together do I make over to thee: this thy (man) shall live a hundred autumns!
Bestow upon them thought, decked with all beauty. May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.
These very bounteous Gods made the Sun mount to heaven, and spread the righteous laws of Aryas
Since the strong Rudra, O Maruts with brilliant chests, sprang into life for you in Prsni's radiant lap.
6 O Cows, ye fatten e'en the worn and wasted, and make the unlovely beautiful tolook on.
7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up from out the sea,By him the Strong and Mighty One we lull and make the people sleep.
10 Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong courser bathed, to win the prize.
5 Hath he not, purified, impregned the kine whb long to meet their Lord,
Worthy of sacred food, praised Agni! loose the smoke, ruddy and beautiful to see.
3 We call upon that Indra, who, most active, ever slays the foe:
Who born in Law hath waxen mighty by the Law, King, God, and lofty Ordinance.
c Thou art the form, colour by name, in the lordship of Brhaspati, give me offspring.
richer, when his will is accomplished will restore it or not.' The pressing-stones are the troop of thieves
3 The Housewife Goddess, Aditi, and Sindhu, the Goddess Svasti I implore for friendship:
has double seed. They also say, 'He placed it in the mare.' Therefore the mare has double seed. They also
continuity of the sacrifice. He should think of any one whom he hates; verily does he inflict trouble upon
1. YE, who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, have won you Indra's friendship and eternal
1. Sing ye a psalm to Indra; sing a great song to the lofty Sage,
4 They with surpassing skill, most wise, have measured out the Twins united in their birth and in their
1. INDRA and Visnu, at my task's completion I urge you on with food and sacred service.
2 To thee, O wanderer at will, ring out the lauds with beams of day,
They say, 'They foam over the barrier, they foam over speech, but over mind they do not foam.' He
created Agni; he being created went away from him [1]; he followed him with this (verse), 'He hath
4 His goings-forth kindle as 'twere high voices the goings of the auspicious Friend of Agni.
up; it is liable to crush the sacrifice face to face; in that he sets up (the stake) (for Tvastr) with the wives,
All Gods of one accord have set Indra in front preeminent.
5 Mayst thou, O Indra, on the day of trial, present or absent, wheresoe'er thou dwellest,
4. Agni, on thy most easy car, entreated, hither bring the Gods!
10 Hasting to help, come hither and protect him, keep him from harm when he is here, O Indra.
These songs, O Soma-drinker, cheered by Soma, Indra, accept from thy most zealous poet.
Borne on your lightly-rolling chariot come to us, together with the sunbeams come.
He in the heart reveals his thought. Let sacred worship rise anew. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and
Jñāna, or knowledge, is the theoretical understanding obtained by listening to the Guru and from the study of the scriptures. Vijñāna is the realization of that knowledge as an internal awakening and wisdom from within. The intellect of the advanced yogi becomes illumined by both jñāna and vijñāna. Equipped with wisdom, the yogi sees all material objects as modifications of the material energy. Such a yogi does not differentiate between objects based on their attractiveness to the self. The enlightened yogi sees all things in their relationship with God. Since the material energy belongs to God, all things are meant for his service. The word kuṭastha refers to one who distances the mind from the fluctuating perceptions of senses in contact with the material energy, neither seeking pleasurable situations nor avoiding unpleasurable ones. Vijitendriya is one who has subjugated the senses. The word yukt means one who is in constant communion with the Supreme. Such person begins tasting the divine bliss of God, and hence becomes a tṛiptātmā, or one fully satisfied by virtue of realized knowledge.
by the nose; verily he has recourse to Vayu of the team with his own share; verily he assigns him
6 Lord! I am not in control of myself and that is the reason I have been a sinner. Alcohol, anger,
Your giant steeds move on, sprung from the waters, like ancient times of Varuna the Mighty.
He, chariot-borne, sun-bright, and truly potent, was poured forth like the longing of the pious.
is an Agnistoma with the Pañcadaça (Stoma), for the gaining of Prajapati; (it has) the characteristics of
6 Thou with thy wisdom, power, and works of wonder, hast stored the ripe milk in the raw cows' udders
Kept secret though his flames are bright seekingon all sides, quickly found.
1. Thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like showers of rain from heaven,
3 Wise, ne.'er deceived, uncircumscribed, refulgent, our gracious guest, a Friend with good attendants,
6 Over the heights have they attained the highest thread that is spun out,
13 Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation-bearer's sister hymns
So may our songs of praise come nigh to Agni who was born to give the Arya strength.
He made the two bowls part asunder like two skins. Vaisvanara put forth all his creative power.
5. The fastenings of the dove-tailed (joints), of the reed (-covering), of the frame-work, do we loosen here from the
Priest ne'er deceived, he sits in Ila's holy place, girt round in Ila's holy place.
4 For tracks of Order and refreshing viands attend from ancient times the goodly Infant.
1. FOR him the Mornings made their courses longer, and Nights with pleasant voices spake to Indra.
quarters are connected with the Anustubh; verily by the metres he wins these worlds in order.
8 To us who laud thee, Agni, bring fresh food and safe and happy homes.
1. STREAMS of this Potent One have flowed easily to the straining-cloth:
Now may these Maruts show us loving-kindness, Gods who of old were ever prompt to help us.
8 Ye warded off with cold the fire's fierce burning; food very rich in nouripliment ye furnished.
2. Smote swiftly forts, and Sambara, then Yadu and that Turvasa,
1. TASTE offerings never tasted yet, as bards enjoy the foeman's wealth.
breath is in the upper part; whether he does one, or the other, there is variation in both cases. A Brahman
famous the giver of fame, with good heroes, the undeceived, O Agni, the deceiver of foes in the highest
Dhatr was the overlord. They praised with nine, the fathers were created, Aditi was the overlady. They
On these two paths each moving creature travels, each thing between the Father and the Mother.
11 The path of sacrifice was made to travel to the farther goal:
which he does when he digs; he pours water over, for expiation he pours (water) mixed with barley;
My consort I beheld in degradation. The Falcon then brought me the pleasant Soma.
he comes to the place on earth for sacrifice, who sacrifices. 'Wherein aforetime all the gods rejoiced', he
Why art thou angry with us, Jatavedas? Destruction fall on those who lie against thee!
Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom to the Five Tribes the Sage attains with labour.
stick. He rubs the enclosing-sticks; verily he purifies them. He rubs each once, for the sacrifice there is
placed, thence does he commence it. If he were to instigate him with his hand, he would shiver; if with
Good guardian art thou, not to be deceived, Most Wise! Far from deceits thy name dwelleth in holy
Convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy thoughts ourhymns of praise and worship.
sacrifice; the sacrifice touched them not; what was superabundant in the sacrifice touched them. The
2. The Vasus set that Agni in the dwelling, fair to behold, for help, from every quarter:
May our purpose be common. With these wishes we offer Thee our oblations.
39. Being yonder thou knowest (what takes place) here; being here thou beholdest these things. Here (men)
planning to injure him; and him that plans to injure us, when we do plan to injure him.
The heaven's four regions drew forth drink and vigour: now whither hath her noblest portion vanished?
When Visvamitra was Sudas's escort, then Indra through the Kusikas grew friendly.
13 I invocate the Child of Strength, Agni with purifying flame,
them he bestowed expiration (with the words) 'Thou art the overlord'; inspiration (with the word)
To keep the truth of all that stands and all that moves, ye guard the station of your Son who knows no
2. In holy thought he ponders much for the great service of theGods,
the waters; thou art the sitter on the hawk', he says; that is the form of Agni; verily by his form he wins
4. Attached not at all to the flesh, nor to the fat, not at all to the marrow, may the splotched, moist, placenta come
33 O Agni, thou on whom all other fires depend, as branches on the parent stem,
places on the Agnidh's altar the pressing-stones, the cups for Vayu, and the wooden trough, for they take
22 Out of thy bounty, Indra, hath Prastoka bestowed ten coffers and ten mettled horses.
food; he becomes a possessor of food. He who desires, 'May I be an eater of food', should offer a cake
13 When his wrath thundered, when he rent Vrtra to pieces, limb by limb,
went to the world of heaven. Those who knowing thus perform (the rite of) these thirty-two (nights)--the
constituents; (the offering) of three constituents [4] is the whole of the sacrifice; verily he sacrifices with
Exulting with the bolt I slaughtered Vrtra, and for the offerer oped with might the cow-stall.
11 Beside a thousand spotted kine I have received a gift of gold,
4 With three-fourths Purusa went up: onefourth of him again was here.
May Indra-vigour fill thee full, as Surya fills mid-air with rays
4 May we be close to both the Worlds who suffer no pain, Parents of Gods, who aid with favour,
4. Joy, mightiest Indra, that perceives, sprung from deep Soma draughts, whereby
12 From all the regions of the world let Indra send security,
'Ye are the two feet of the sacrifice', he says, for these are the two feet of the sacrifice [3]; and also (it
5 As such, O Caster of the Stone, come with thy succours wonderful,
both the gods whom he sacrifices to and those to whom he does not sacrifice, he pays homage, for his
53. And if he roasts the sterile cow at home, whether he makes a sacrifice of her, or not, he sins against the gods
By revealing the locations where lust resides, Shree Krishna now indicates that there is a method of controlling it. The fortress of the enemy must be spotted before one can lay siege on it. In this verse, Shree Krishna states that the senses, mind, and intellect are the places from where lust exercises its dominion over the soul. Under the sway of lust, the sense objects are desired by the senses, the senses infatuate the mind, the mind misleads the intellect, and the intellect loses its discriminatory powers. When the intellect is clouded, the living being is deluded to become a slave of lust and will do anything to satiate it.These instruments—senses, mind, and intellect—are not bad in themselves. They were given to us for the purpose of achieving God-realization, but we have permitted lust in its many forms to lay siege on them. Now, we have to use the same senses, mind, and intellect to uplift ourselves. In the following verses, Shree Krishna explains how to do that.
8 Touched by the goad the shaggy beast went nobly, bound to the pole by the yoke's thong of leather.
Garhapatya fire is piled up; for yonder world the Ahavaniya. If he were to cast it on-the Garhapatya fire,
9 Ye Guileless Gods, bestow on us a refuge strong on every side,
3 Brought forth together with wisdom and mighty power thou grewest great; with hero deeds subduing
to the world of the gods. They pay reverence with one (verse); verily in one place they bestow strength
the god Soma, possessing good seed [4], may I impregnate seed', he says; Soma is the impregnator of
it; now the horse is connected with Prajapati; verily by Prajapati he piles the fire. It is a naturally
deep. 'Here do I cast out the spell [1] which an equal or an unequal hath buried', he says; there are two
support in the quarters; it is made in milk; verily he bestows brilliance upon him; he takes it out, to make
1. Be, like thyself, O Indra, strong for our delight: here lauded, aid us, Maghavan, drinker of the juice.
verily he makes it for the Pitrs; 'To the sky thee! To the sun thee!' he says; verily he makes it for the
6 Splendours they gained for glory, they who wear bright rings; rays they obtained, and men to
Even him who formed these two, the Earth and Heaven the Parents, with their forms, and every
of one who combs her hair is bald and feeble; (the son born) of one who anoints (her eyes) is blind; (the
8 May the far-seeing Sun rise up to bless us: be the four Quarters of the sky auspicious.
2 That light of thine in heaven and earth, O Agni, in plants, O Holy One, and in the waters,
11 Swift was new friendship with the maid they quickly accepted it as genuine seed and bounty.
9 Indra and Agni, yours are all the treasures of the heavens and earth.
d With thy light which is in the sky, on the earth, in the broad atmosphere, do thou for this sacrificer
instigation of Savitr he brings them forward. The axle which is tied on both sides is Varuna of evil
With Kubha; and with these, Sindhu and Mehatnu, thou seekest in thy course Krumu and Gomati.
second, and himself with the third. Indra slew Vrtra; the gods said of him, 'Great hath he become who
continues without intermission, and the autumnal one; destroy the cold takman, the hot, him that comes in
keep awake (do thou watch over) among the people in the kingdom of the (earthly) Rohita (the king)!
7 The pious call Sarasvati, they worship Sarasvati while sacrifice proceedeth.
Hymns, only hymns, with love for thee, I weave thee: then hear, O Indra, these mine invocations.
scriptures IN THEIR ENTIRETY. Numerous sites exist that provide portions of scriptures and/or
2. By a Brâhmana thou hast been blest, by Kanva, the descendant of Nrishad. Thou goest like a stronor army;
is a pair. Seven are these offerings, the tame animals are seven, the wild seven; the metres are seven, for
that he puts these down, he unites these with (the waters) of the sky; Parjanya becomes likely to rain [4].
and mine alone. I shall not allow the thought of other women to enter my mind.
e The sky, penetrated by ambrosia, the unconquered (thou art); the Adityas are thy guardians, the sun is
The race of kine thou cleansest, Pavamana! Thou didst beget: and speed the Sun with splendours.
Priest, best at worship, must shine forth in glory . Agni shall be raised high with man's oblations.
I make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine own, while I exalt thy sovran might.
The Bhagavad Gita concludes with this verse delivering a deep pronouncement. Dhritarashtra was apprehensive of the outcome of the war. Sanjay informs him that material calculations of the relative strengths and numbers of the two armies are irrelevant. There can be only one verdict in this war—victory will always be on the side of God and his pure devotee, and so will goodness, supremacy, and abundance. God is the independent, self-sustaining sovereign of the world, and the most worthy object of adoration, and worship. na tatsamaśh chābhyadhikaśhcha dṛiśhyate (Śhwetaśhvatar Upaniṣhad 6.8) [v44] “There is no one equal to him; there is no one greater than him.” He merely needs a proper medium to manifest his incomparable glory. The soul who surrenders to him provides such a vehicle for the glory of God to shine forth. Thus, wherever the Supreme Lord and his pure devotee are present, the light of the Absolute Truth will always vanquish the darkness of falsehood. There can be no other outcome.
May our libations be most sweet to make thee glad, O Soma-drinker, Heavenly Lord.
the sacrifice?' Fried grains, mush, rice grains, the cake, clotted milk, thereby the five is made up; that is
15 May Gods destroy this day the evil-doer may each hot curse of his return and blast him.
art (now) sound of limb, for thee sound sight, and sound life have I obtained.
To Agni, saviour from distress, (offering is made) on eight potsherds; to Indra, saviour from distress, on
3 Guard us, O Rudras. with your guar4 save us, ye skilled to save, my we
said, 'Come, let us interchange them'; with food the gods invited Agni [4], with the kingdom the Pitrs
May we know these whose treasures are like those of milch-kine, Thunderer!
cattle [2]; verily he wins various cattle; variety is seen in his house for whom these are put down, and
(instrument), for the ass is worse than the horse [2]; they lead the horse in front to avoid confusion;
When I won glory in the great foe-slaying fight, in battle where Karanja fell, and Parnaya.
have their name. In that he puts down the 'sitters on the vault', the sacrificer thus goes by the 'sitters on
mind, one utters in speech'. 'Then assuredly they will not sacrifice to you with speech', said (speech).
To Mitra and Varuna (he offers) clotted curds; the sacrificial fee is a cow. To Brhaspati (he offers) an
holy order is this (earth); verily he conquers this (earth). 'Thee for the might of holy order', he says; the
2 A cry was raised which reached the Gods, O Indra, a cry to them to send us strength in combat.
4 Thou Everlasting, whom, far-striding fain to burn, the winds, uninterrupted, never overcome,
Ye, Asvins, with your magic powers rent up the tree and shattered it.
14 Who knoweth, verily, of these where the All-shakers take delight,
10 Come from the enemy to us, to svaha and the Soma-draught.
thou call hither the warriors; with thy friends beat vigorously down the enemies!
2 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones and from the spine,
Against the foe of prayer, devourer of raw flesh, the vile fiend fierce of eye, keep ye perpetual hate.
2 The food which, Mightiest Indra, thou possessest worthy of renown
7 In purifying, through the sieve the rapid drops of'Soma juice
None may restrain thee, yet come hither to the draught! Thou, movest mighty in thy power.
4 When night was turning to the grey of morning the Maiden, Surya's Daughter, chose your splendour.
the gods thereby appropriated the force, might, power, strength [2], offspring, and cattle of the Asuras,
support in it, and shivers not. 'Has he gone, O Agnidh? he says. If (the Agnidh) were to say, 'Agni has
the hind part. Then the gods prospered, the Asuras were defeated; in that he makes portions of three
possessed of cattle. On a place of sacrifice seized by destruction should he make him to sacrifice for
This is thy boast, thou smotest with thy peers, and joined with heroes dravest off disgrace.
1. Here, Indra, is thy Soma draught, made pure upon the sacred grass:
7 The Twain, who from the lofty sky seem to look down on herds below,
three potsherds are commensurate with the threefold breath, the breath is threefold [4]; verily in order he
May he to whom prayed fettered Sunahsepa, may he the Sovran Varuna release us.
'For those of good fruits thee, for the plants', he says. Therefore plants bear fruit. If he were to scratch
2. Thou, Indra, art the conqueror: thou gavest splendour to the Sun.
Splendid art thou, O Indra, wise, unbending:strengthen us with might, O Lord of Power.
1. BRING adoration ample and most excellent, hymn, offierings, to the watchful Twain, the bountiful,
5 The most glorious Lord is in the clouds, the sky, the heaven, and everywhere else. Recognize him in
o Harm not the sacrifice nor the lord of the sacrifice, O all-knowing;
4.11.6 Sukta 6 – Prayer for deliverance from calamity, addressed to the entire Pantheon
4 Urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guileless rivers which
Even there may Brahmanaspati, and Aditi protect us well, protect us well through all our days.
When ever wilt thou, Indra Maghavan, come nigh to presser's or to praiser's call?
The awful car, Brhaspati, that quells the foe, slays demons, cleaves the stall of kine, and finds the light.
3 Pusan the Strong hath knowledge of sweet praises even as Indu hath.
2. To thy advising minister, whom thou, Arâti, didst make thy agent, do we make obeisance. Do not bring failure to
They laid good timber in the fire-receivers, and burnt the grass up where they found it growing.
7 Agni shines forth when born, observant, mighty, the bountiful, the Singar praised by sages;
Vaisvanara be gracious to assist us, may the Immortal favour us and help us.
(sky); verily with them do they proceed, verily also in them they find support. These indeed are the
Shree Krishna now expounds upon the six traits of those who possess demoniac natures. They are hypocrites, meaning they make an external show of virtuous behavior for impressing others, without possessing the matching internal traits. This creates an artificial Jekyll and Hyde personality, which is impure internally but has the external appearance of being pure. The behavior of demoniac natured people is arrogant and disrespectful to others. They are proud and conceited about their bodily possessions and designations, such as wealth, education, beauty, position, etc. They become angry when, due to lack of control of the mind, their lust and greed are frustrated. They are cruel and harsh, and devoid of sensitivity for others’ sufferings in their interactions with them. They have no understanding of the spiritual principles and hold unrighteousness to be righteousness.
Borne in his golden chariot he cometh, Savitar, God who looks on every creature.
1. To make this Varuna come forth sing thou a song unto the band of Maruts wiser than thyself,This Varuna who guardeth well the thoughts of men like herds of kine.
The mighty Maghavan who is the sage's Friend advanceth more and more his beauteous progeny.
1. For Indra flow most rich in sweets, O Soma, bringing him delight!
did not approach the new moon night and the full moon night [4]. They grasped him about, and illness
priests (praisha), the draughts of soma (graha), oblations (are founded) upon the ukkhishta.
much; if he were to do so, there would be a violent torrent to destroy the Adhvaryu. He should not throw
for fire is extinguished by cold, (and these serve) for kindling. 'Thy dread form, O Agni', he says; verily
year; he obtains the Viraj. For thirty nights should he be consecrated [2]; the Viraj has thirty syllables;
7 We, the Vasisthas, now implore thee, Agni, O Son of Strength, the Lord of wealth and riches.
'By sacrifice to the god Agni, may I be an eater of food', he says; Agni is among the gods the eater of
May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions by our own exertion.
1. AGNI who knowest all, accept our offering and the cake of meal,
[3], the sacrifice is not ruined, nor the sacrificer. He puts down eight; the Gayatri has eight syllables;
Blameless, in turn they traverse thirty regions, and dart across the spirit in a moment.
4.7.76 Sukta 76 – Charm for curing Scrofulous Sores called Apakit
1. THE drop of Soma juice effused flows onward with this stream impelled.
grasped it, and sacrificed with it. Then indeed they prospered in both worlds, this and yonder. Those,
that hates me; it shall ascend upon my head unto excellence!
7 Bring to us, Agni, Angiras, lauded of old and lauded now,
How, with them, she though firm, strong-minded, haughty, travels to women happy in their fortune.
He, Pavamana, granted strength to Indra: he, Indu, generated light in Surya.
Wise Jatavedas we implore with prayers for grace, the Sage, the Hotar-priest, bounteous, and void of
For him the Floods stood still, the Seven Mothers, Streams easy for the heroes to pass over.
cow in strength, the Jagati metre; the beast of burden in strength, the Pankti metre; the goat in strength,
9 By song as 'twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry was prepared
O Thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its stream, so, Indra, flow our songs to thee.
Come, Youthfullest! to those who long to meet thee, and hither bring the Gods, O Mighty Victor.
11 So may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on the viands of the Brahman.
Unbarred the firm doors for the kine of Morning, and, with the Angirases, set free the cattle.
1. THESE men's great bounty hath been manifested, and the whole world of life set free from darkness.
4 Thou worshippest great Gods: bring them without delay by wisdom and thy wondrous power.
they come with treasures, having heard (thy fame). For they know (thee to be) the destroyer of the takman.
Seize quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma juice for Indra's drink.
be his ruin. He smooths it with his hand, for the protection of the sacrificer. The theologians say, 'What
b O wife, come hither to the heaven; let us two mount! Yes, let us two mount the heaven; I will mount
Let him with song inspired laud Varuna who supports the folk who follow varied rites.
Crushing the wolf, the serpent, and the demons, may they completely banish all affliction.
57 The Great Inviolate are kissing Indu, and singing in his place like eager sages.
22. The five divine regions, the twelve divine seasons, the teeth of the year, they shall ever be propitious, to us!
That in the great encounter with the foemen, Loved of all life, Indra may guard and help us.
3. The spell which they have put for thee into solipeds, into animals with teeth on both sides, that which they have
What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as a Father, art invoked.
7. O thou who slayest Vritras, come, O Indra, hither to our side,
2 Thou, Soma, art effused for Indra by the men, balmed in the wood as wave, Sage, Viewer of
So, wondrous, fair, and famed for great deeds come to us, through our hymn, Asvins, when ye hear.
8 Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, follows the path of his decrees.
May he this day gain with our men the sunlight. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be oursuccour.
1. Flow onward with that juice of thine most excellent, that brings delight,
adorns the quarters; verily from the quarters he wins strength and sap. The speckled butter is the
1. FORWARD upon their way proceed the ready teams, the lovely songs.
18 Choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, uninjured by the Raksas foe,
3 Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pouring their presents forth to win a stall of kine,
He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield the precious meed as to a victor.
the atmosphere is commensurate with two thousand; verily be conquers the atmosphere. He should pile
verily also he wins the quarters for him. 'O mother, come forth', he says; women are likely to desire him
While (the fire) was flaming upwards to strike, just then of itself it stayed; whether so much was before
Having described the position of those who worship the Supreme Lord, Shree Krishna now explains the situation of those who worship the lower gods for material gains. They are also endowed with faith, and they may have their supplications answered by the celestial gods, but their understanding is incomplete. They do not realize that the celestial beings receive their powers from God Himself. Hence, they also worship the Supreme Divine Personality, albeit indirectly. For example, if a government officer redresses a complaint by a citizen, he is not credited with being benevolent. He is merely utilizing the powers in his jurisdiction that have been bestowed upon him by the government. Similarly, all the powers of the celestial gods come from the Supreme Lord. Thus, those with superior understanding do not go by the indirect route; they worship the source of all powers, which is God Himself. Such worship that is offered to the Supreme Lord automatically satisfies the entire creation:yathā taror mūla-niṣhechanenatṛipyanti tatskandhabhujopaśhākhāḥprāṇopahārāchcha yathendriyāṇāṁtathaiva sarvārhaṇam achyutejyā (Bhagavatam 4.31.14)“When we water the root of a tree, its trunk, branches, twigs, leaves, and flowers all become nourished. When we put food in our mouth, it nourishes the life airs and the senses automatically. In the same way, by worshipping the Supreme Lord, all His parts, including the devatās are also worshipped.” However, if we begin watering the leaves of a tree, while neglecting its roots, the tree will perish. Likewise, the worship offered to the celestial gods certainly makes its way to the Supreme Lord, but such devotees do not get spiritual benefits. This is elaborated in the next verse.
8 May we invoke thee as a liberal giver thou givest us, O Indra, strength and labours.
Then Indra said, about to slaughter Vrtra, O my friend Vrtra, stride full boldly forward.
bond of Sarasvati, of speech, the binder, I anoint thee with the lordship of Agni, with the lordship of
with the holy power (Brahman). He sprinkles the kindling-wood and the sacrificial strew; verily he
creating a lot of heat but no light, is like a cow that does not yield any milk, or like a tree that does not
21 He, being purified, hath made the Mornings shine: this, even this is he who gave the rivers room.
these are performed. The last he recites with the word 'light' in it; verily he bestows on him light above,
They whose terrestrial dwelling-place is wide-extended, whom none suspect of sin, whose bands have
violently to take it from him. He wept; in that he wept (arodit), that is why Rudra has his name. The tear
5 Sage Agni, be whom thou dost urge, in worship of the Gods, to wealth,
4. The ten swift fingers deck thee forth seven ministers impel thee on,
2. May you have the harmony of mind and heart. May the Lord cause you to pursue common goals.
4 As for a year the Rbhus kept the Milch-cow, throughout a year fashioned and formed her body,
only what should be spoken. The inner grace of a person shows up through the words spoken by him.
Demolish with thy flame his ribs, O Agni, the Yatudhana's root destroy thou triply.
1. WHAT time, first springing into life, thou neighedst, proceeding from the sea or upper waters,
23 Wherewith ye, Lords of Hundred Powers, helped Kutsa, son of Aduni, gave Turviti and Dabhiti
2. With my mind do I seize your minds: do ye with your thoughts follow my thought! I place your hearts in my
12 Firm be the fellies of your wheels, steady your horses and your cars,
eleven potsherds, to Soma an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a brown (animal). To Soma and Pusan he
3. O husband of the tardâ (-female), O husband Of the vaghâ (-female), ye of the sharp teeth, listen to me! The
2. And in thy friendship, Indu, most sublime and glorious, may we
3 Lightly disporting them, the drops flow to one common reservoir,
The Part of the Hotr in the New and Full Moon Sacrifice
2. With his offspring does he trade, of his cattle is he deprived, that refuses to give the cow of the gods to the
verily with offspring and cattle he unites him. To the sky the deficiency of the sacrifice goes, to the earth
3 Bright God whose steeds are goats, thou art a stream of wealth, a treasure-heap,
23. The amrita (ambrosia), bought for the price of a chariot, which Mâtalî knows as a remedy, that Indra stored
stop of Visnu [1], overcomer of the foe, mount the Anustubh metre, step along the quarters, excluded is
possessing the sun, thee that dost illumine the sky, the earth, the broad atmosphere, support the
9 I have declared this speech of adoration to mightiest Pusan and victorious Vayu,
Lord of all boons, thou art the Cleanser and a Sage. Pay worship, and enjoy the good.
Who was appointed as a learned Brahman, -what is the sacrificer's knowledge of him?
heifer are the sacrificial fees; verily with darkness [1] he smites away the darkness which is death. Gold
No other prince, no folk is held more liberal of gifts than they.
2 He goes to end his work with lightning flashes: wide is the seat his Asura glory gives him.
appease it. Now, as each part is performed, the Raksases seek to injure the sacrifice; 'The Raksas is
verily he has recourse to the plants with their own share; verily they from his own self beget him
To him in time of need they sing for life with offspring and with strength.
17 To thee proceed the dark, the treasure-holders, both of them sanctified by Surya's bounty.
He who gives flavour to our food, the home of every man that lives.
Hero who fortified his body in the wars, and through his greatness set the heaven upon his head.
1. THE friends who offer Soma long to find thee: they pour forth Soma and present their viands.
Who verily alone upholds the threefold, the earth, the heaven, and all living creatures.
1. Come, we have pressed theJuice for thee; O Indra, drink this Soma here:
16 As in the days of old our ancient Fathers, speeding the work of holy worship, Agni,
6. In thee, effused. O Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great supremacy in fight:
Hotr would [1] experience misfortune; if he were to offer it in the fire, he would give the cattle to Rudra,
2 So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, Lord of spreading light,
13 Alas! thou art indeed a weakling, Yama we find in thee no trace of heart or spirit.
Desert us not in this great fray, in battles for the sake of kine.
10 We claim protection from the Hills, we claim protection of the Floods,
1. To him, your own, the best among the good, I bring eulogy, like oblation in the kindled fire.
sacrifice. He makes the offering after crossing over without coming back; verily he drives away his foes
2 Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what thou choosest of the flowing Soma.
a Thou, O Agni, art Rudra, the Asura of the mighty sky,
8 With sacrifices and with milk they deck you first, ye Righteous Ones, as if through stirrings of the
gained. He brings (the victims) up with a verse ad dressed to Vayu; verily winning it from Vayu he
When straightway on the region's farthest edge I brought the God who makes the lights to broaden and
7 Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, O Brhaspati, and thou, O Indra.
Bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, and let us vanquish with thine aid.
6 When, laden with the holy oil, the Sitster [sic] by the Mother stands,
2 To Indra from all sides go forth my songs of praise, the Lord of Hundred Powers, strong, Hero, like
Verily she proclaims him among the gods, and the gods take note of him.
1. Sing ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, Lord of tawny steeds,
Wherewith by thee assisted and triumphant, we may laud thee in gaining seed and offspring.
smothered and dead. The gods understood, 'Him who of us dies, it is the Raksases who kill.' They
establishes the beginning of the sacrifice on the east. 'The surface of the tawny one, the thirty fourfold',
May he himself with darts of death drive far from us the scorner's hate.
13 Indra and Agni, I will call you hither and make you joyful with the gifts I offer.
4.6.71 Sukta 71 – Brahmanical Prayer at the receipt of Gifts
1.2.33 Mantra 33 – Rudra (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
Give us O Mightiest, what is great, to see and to enjoy the earth.
6 So Agni stands on earth's most central station, invested in well-decorated garments.
expiration and inspiration. Mitra produced the day, Varuna the night; then indeed did this shine forth; in
Him your own Agni, serve ye well, who winneth and bestoweth wealth.
might, has made friendly to himself; she, the mother, shall pour forth milk for me, the son!
8 O Indra, come thou pure to us, with pure assistance, pure thyself.
Who with their rush o'erthrow as 'twere a sinner the mortal who would fight with those who love him
6. May the Gods help and favour us out of the place whence Vishnu strode
3 Full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling together stood the Darling's Mothers.
Highest and mightiest are the Sons of Prsni. Firm to their own intention cling the Maruts.
14 I have brought forth a song when longing seized me: ere the decisive day will I laud Indra;
share. He throws it away thrice; these worlds are three; verily he excludes him from these worlds. He
1. YEA, this is good to taste and full of. sweetness, verily it is strong and rich in flavour.
May we with best endeavours gain this friendship, and mayst thou bend the godless scorner's
Indra caused Manu to sacrifice with his wife; after she had been encircled with fire he let her go;
reflected, 'Here we are making a disturbance of the sacrifice', they saw a ransom in the bunch of grass
7 Lord of Bay Steeds, at dawn thejuice thou drankest: thine, only thine, is the noonday libation.
Come to our succour with your team, that ye may drink the Soma juice.
6. Worship the Vasus, Agni! here, the Rudras and Adityas, all
Food noble, plenteous, far from sin and evil, he with us, and fair fame to make us happy.
cook themselves with the Upasads. With two they cut off their hair, with two their skin, with two their
3 Sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden goad,
1. I CALL with prayers on Aditi your Goddess, on Agni, Mitra, Varuna for favour,
creatures led by the nose; he becomes possessed of a village. It is offered to (Vayu) of the team; verily
cattle, (the grains) for the yoker of bays are cattle verily they make cattle find support in cattle.
Therefore they won them holy names for worship, and nobly born they dignified their bodies.
2. (That he may come) to us, let us honour with obeisance glory-owning Indra, the glorious one with glory-yielding
1. Let our songs come anear to him beauteous and bright with piercing flame,
5 Then never were your praiser loathed like a wild beast in pasture-land,
seasons are six; verily he delights the seasons. He performs twelve at an Ahina Soma sacrifice, the year
8 Thy dear folk, Indra, who present oblations, are, in chief place, thy friends, O Thunder-wielder.
A priest discharges the function of performing ritualistic worship and ceremonies in temples and homes. Brihaspati is the chief priest in heaven. He is thus the topmost of all priests. Here, Shree Krishna says that amongst priests, he is Brihaspati. However, in the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam, verse 11.16.22, Shree Krishna states that amongst the priests he is Vashishtha. Why is he differing in the two places? This implies that we should not attach importance to the object, but to the opulence of God that manifests in that object. All the objects of glory that Shree Krishna is describing here should also be understood in the same light. It is not the object that is being emphasized, rather God’s opulence that is manifesting in it.Kartikeya, the son of Lord Shiv, who is also called Skanda, is the commander-in-chief of the celestial gods. He is thus the chief of all military commanders, and best reflects the opulence of God. Shree Krishna further says that amongst stagnant bodies of water, he is the grave and mighty ocean.
4 This Payamana up above Trita's high ridge hath made the Sun,
He mid the worlds his lofty place hath taken. Into green plants is gone the Purifying.
3. Inviolable power of Gods, subduing all his enemies, Agni is mightiest in fame.
Tāmasic happiness is of the lowest kind and is foolishness from beginning to end. It throws the soul into the darkness of ignorance. And yet, since there is a tiny experience of pleasure in it, people get addicted to it. That is why cigarette smokers find it difficult to break their habit, even while knowing fully well it is harming them. They are unable to reject the happiness they get from the addiction. Shree Krishna states that such pleasures—derived from sleep, laziness, and negligence—are in the mode of ignorance.
We constantly exercise our free will to make choices, and our cumulative choices determine where we reach in life. Robert Frost vividly describes this in his poem, The Road Not Taken:I shall be telling this with a sighSomewhere ages and ages hence;Two roads diverged in a wood, and I,I took the one less traveled by,And that has made all the difference.To make proper choices, a developed faculty of discrimination is required. The Bhagavad Gita itself was spoken to Arjun to equip him with the power of discrimination. At the outset, Arjun was confused about his duty. His inordinate attachment to his relatives had bewildered his judgment regarding proper and improper action. Feeling weak and fearful, and in utter confusion, he had surrendered to the Lord and requested him to enlighten him regarding his duty. Through the divine song of wisdom, Lord Krishna helped Arjun develop his power of discrimination, until he finally concluded: “I have explained to you the knowledge that is more secret than all secrets. Ponder over it deeply, and then do as you wish.” (verse 18.63)The mode of goodness illumines the intellect with the light of knowledge thereby refining its ability to discriminate the right and wrong of things, actions, and sentiments. The sāttvic intellect is one that makes known to us what type of action is to be performed and what type of action is to be renounced, what is to be feared and what is to be ignored. It explains to us the reason for the shortcomings in our personality and reveals the solution for them.
Then is it easy for thee and thy car to pass. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
13 In the great rite the wise dame called, Nasatyas, you, Lords of many treasures, to assist her.
2. For he, O Indra, hath produced for thee the newest gladdening song,
gapes should say, 'Skill and intelligence (remain) in me'; verily he places expiration and inspiration in
shrinking back make the host of his foe to shrink back. They should be offered for one who is mad; for it
1. YOUR well-known prompt activities aforetime needed no impulse from your faithful servant.
Him who is fain to overpower the man who long sacrificeth.
places strength in the midst of cattle; verily also he closes the cut in the beast. Having made offering of
consecration, forsake me not', he says, and consecration departs not from him, his dark colour and his
Whatever health and strength our father Manu won by sacrifice may we, under thy guidance, gain.
the plants perish. He spreads the sacrificial strew; therefore the plants again revive. He spreads over the
12 Thou settest free the rushing wave of waters, the floods' great swell encompassed and obstructed.
end he grasps the end, and becomes not worse. He who practises witchcraft should draw the Manthin
On this our grass sit Aditi, happy Mother, and let our Hail! delight the Gods Immortal.
1.10.136Mantra 136 – Kesins (Authors: Juti, Vatajuti, Viprajuti, Vrsanaka, Karikrata, Etasa,
My thought to him resistless, praise-deserving, prayers offered most especially to Indra.
3 Indra smote down, Agni consumed, O Indu, the Dasyus ere the noontide in the conflict.
eleven potsherds, and offered it, and the two (gods) restored offspring to him. Indra and Agni indeed
4. May the Apsaras restore thee, may Indra, may Bhaga restore thee; may all the gods restore thee, that thou
In battle may he be our help and strengthener, yea, be the saviour of our lives.
5 Brhaspati, make us evermore an easy path: we crave what boon thou hast for men in rest and stir.
12 They made a mansion for their Father, deftly provided him a great and glorious dwelling;
1. GLORIFY him whose might is all-surpassing, Indra the much-invoked who fights uninjured.
Will not forget thy friendship, liberal Giver. So shall the days dawn prosperous for the princes.
He hides him in the secret couple's bosom. The Bird dwells in the middle of the fountain.
formerly born, and the latter born! The varana shall watch over thee!
Even the wild steer in his thirst is captured: the leather strap still holds his foot entangled.
other of them dies before his day. He loves to frequent the house of him whose house he burns; he
that bestows wealth liberally, the kindly goddess, wealth shall she bestow upon us!
2 For thee, O Purifier, flow the drops of fatness rich in oil.
They bend not even to the mighty's anger: the King himself pays homage and reveres them.
Moves with his chariot first in rank and wealthy, munificent and lauded in assemblies.
13 O Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and companionless art thou:
front. He puts down the last with the word 'light'; there fore speech, which is the last, is the light of the
thus pays reverence to the fire. The day was the gods', the night the Asuras'. The Asuras entered night
verily he wins them. 'Return with strength', 'Return with wealth', (with these words) he offers oblations
4 Whose pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen challenge not:
21. The earth is the staff, the atmosphere the embryo, the heaven the whip (itself?), the lightning the whip-cord; of
Good Indra, make our prayer succeed, and prosper this our sacrifice.
The Asvin Pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
11 Thoughts ancient, seeking wealth, with adoration, with newest lauds have sped to thee, O Mighty.
3. Indra whose right hand wields the bolt we worship, driver of bay steeds seeking sundered courses.
priests?' 'Brilliance and power' is (the answer). 'What by the second?' 'The breaths and food.' 'What by
18 From me to Rathaviti say, when he hath pressed the Soma juice,
With his Car-steeds at once 'hath our Indra guided the reins and the car of these men.
A Bull art thou when bellowing,-at your glad carouse-thou dost impregn the Sisters. Thou art waxing
A shout is heard like Indra's in the battle: thou flowest on, sending this voice before thee.
11 How shall we speak to the great might of Rudra? How speak to Bhaga who takes thought for riches?
24. That fragrance of thine which has entered into the lotus, that fragrance, O earth, which the immortals of yore
Sit on the sacred grass at this our worship, and take these drops into thy belly, Indra.
class was created, Indra was the overlord. They praised with seventeen, cattle were created, Brhaspati
waters; if he said not that praise, the divine waters would descend in anger on this world. He says, 'O ye
17 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air,
(poison) which has been dug, that which has not been duo-, and that which is inherent, 1 have held fast. As a
Who, like a gambler gathering his winnings seized the foe's riches, He, O men, is Indra.
10. In close society have come the priests, the sevenfold brotherhood,
7. They that ground (the poison), they that daubed it on, they that hurled it, and they that let it go, all these have
15. As, ruined by the wind, the trees lie prostrate, thus do thou ruin and prostrate my rivals, those formerly born,
10 Kinship have I with you, and close alliance O ye Gods, destroyers of our foes.
He who hath been effused, more rich in meath, for Gods.
laid aside its black form, purifying itself to a bright (form); the red form do I sacrifice fot thee into the fire.
2 Whose way is unattainable like Surya's: he in each fight is the strong Vrtra-slayer,
4 So when the Sun hath risen to-day, may sinless Mitra, Aryaman,
In the priesthood may a Brahmana be born of spiritual glory. In this kingdom may a prince be born, an
12 By Law the Immortal Goddesses the Waters, with meath-rich waves, O Agni, and uninjured,
garment has Soma for its deity. He who consecrates himself approaches Soma as his deity. He says,
2. Through Time the wind blows, through Time (exists) the great earth; the great sky is fixed in Time. In Time the
May we share Savitar's best animating help. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
Who seeth far away, the Ensign, born of Gods. Sing praises unto Surya, to the Son of Dyaus.
When, far from Bhrgus, Matarisvan kindled the oblation-bearer where he lay in secret.
12 As, compassing them round, ye glided through the worlds, where had the venerable Parents their
5. Stablished to fill the juice with vital vigour, giver of wealth, guard of his servant's body,
morrow, to him that returns for two (successive) days, to the takman that returns on the third day, homage shall
5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra that he may grant us gifts of ample riches:
Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his truth supported earth's foundation.
4 Thy portion is the goat: with heat consume him: let thy fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him
the words) 'Hail to the and night!' he pours it down; verily he removes the pain of the earth by day and
39 Winner of gold and goods and cattle flow thou on, set as impregner, Indu, mid the worlds of life.
(With the words), 'Thou art firm (dhruva)', he strokes it; the Dhruva is this (earth); verily he finds
As rivers reach the sea, so, strong with praises, our holy songs reach him the Comprehensive.
high altar, for on the high altar is the fire piled; the high altar is cattle; verily he wins cattle; (verily it
3. Bards joined in song to Indra so that he might drink the Soma juice.
Going to Indra, sharpening his weapons, and in his hand containing every treasure.
rites. The cup for Aditi [1] is drawn. Aditi is this (earth); verily they rest on this (earth). The one and the
41 Forming the water-floods, the buffalo hath lowed, one-footed or two-footed or fourfooted, she,
three, then two, then one; this indeed is the intermediate consecration broader at the top than below;
5 Dawn, bring me wealth: untroubled, with thine oxen thou bearest riches at thy will and pleasure;
thee on earth, the Vaiçvadeva and the Agnimaruta hymns establish thee in firmness, the Çakvara and
1. Come now and let us glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymn!
r By sacrifice to the god Agni, may I be an eater of food [3].
For those who turn away from him, lord of thy cows whom none may kill.
the Brahman is a supporter of vows. When about to undertake a vow he should say, 'O Agni, lord of
Then all the Maruts who were gathered with dice there extolled, O Mighty One, thy powerful majesty.
says; for they divided up these bodies. 'For the mighty', he says; for they divided them up for strength.
stayeth missiles from thee; may the seventeenfold Stoma support thee on earth, the Marutvatiya hymn
God Tvastar Wealth-bestower, the Rbhuksanas, Rodasi, Maruts, Visnu, claim and merit praise.
3. Remain right here, go not away from us; (the roads) at a distance Pûshan shall make impassable for you!
Sarasvati draws forth for him water and butter, milk and meath.
tame animals, seven wild; there are seven metres, (and so it serves) to win both. He offers eleven foresacrifices; ten are the vital airs of the beast, the body is the eleventh; verily his fore-offerings are of the
(earth), the Go the atmosphere [2], the Ayus yonder (sky); verily they mount upon these worlds. If the
Success attends him in the shout of battle. He makes a friend of him in future troubles.
Or Coursers who have triumphed in, the contest, or those who famed, have won the prize with glory.
13 May the Sustainer, high in heaven, come hither, the Bounteous One, invoked, with all his favours,
m Homage to him of the ford, and to him of the bank.
Who shall seek to win the father of the gods [3],
While Indra does to death the daring chieftain of Sandikas exulting in his prowess.
The Priest with the delicious tongue, rich with the light of glorious beams.
4. These (marks) here I have separated, as cows scattered upon the heather. The pure marks shall remain, the
and Rudra with their own portion; verily they bestow upon him splendour; he becomes resplendent. He
cattle [3]. If he desire of a man, 'May he be rich in cattle', he should invoke the Ida directly for him;
12. Shaking those that are unshaken, hurrying to the strife, a conqueror of enemies, an unconquerable leader,
4.1.16 Sukta 16 – Charm with Lead, against Sorcerers and Demons
19 Like Angiras I honour him with worship, and renovate old song for him the Ancient.
8 The pivot of the Sobharis' chariot within the golden box is balmed with milk.
8 The two Invokers I invite, the wise, divine and sweet of tongue,
4 Then Indra at a single draught drank the contents of thirty pails,
2 The clean, healthy, and tasteful water is as beneficial as a mother’s milk is to the infant.
to Aditi; Aditi is this (earth); verily he finds support in this (earth); verily also be extends the sacrifice
5 Agni, invoked and kindled, serve the Gods, thou skilled in sacrifice:
That thou, O Sara, hast bestowed here one and here another'calf.
3. Hero when thou wouldst give thy gifts, neither the Gods nor mortal men
8 Bring ye the great Aramati before you, and Pusan as the Hero of the synod,
Your coursers weary not when speeding on.their way, and rapidly ye reach the end of this your path.
Indra hath taken and possessed all castles, like as one common husband doth his spouses.
Thou art the Charioteer, Agni, of earthly wealth: find rest and safety for our seed.
5. That milch-cow, O Kâma, whom the sages call Vâk Virâg (ruling, or resplendent speech), is said to be thy
3 The thought that bringeth every boon proceedeth to worship first the Priest of the libation,
Maintain the growth of wealth with men who sacrifice. Ye Gods, preserve us with your blessings
2 Whom as a far-foreseeing Sage the Gods have, from the olden time,
1.9.97 Mantra 97 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Vasistha Maitravaruni, Indrapramati Vasistha,
May we, addressing prayer to you, ye Mighty, speak with brave sons about us to. the synod.
2 Effused as cheerer of the men, flowing best gladdener, thou art
oath, and he returned them. He associated with Rohini alone [1]. Illness seized him; 'Illness has seized
I call Brhaspati, Indra, Visnu, all the gods, the Asvins borne by rapid steeds.
i Guardian of life art thou, O Agni, guard my life.
18. Whoever, O Prâna, knows this regarding thee, and (knows) on what thou art supported, to him all shall offer
8 None may obstruct, none overtake, O Maruts, him whom ye succour in the strife of battle
d Thou art firm; make firm the earth, make life firm, make offspring firm, make his follows subordinate
18 Hither may they who wake at dawn bring, to drink Soma both the Gods
worlds by the metres so as to be irrecoverable. 'Thou art the step of Visnu, smiting imprecations', he
grandfather are holy [3], and who yet does not possess holiness. The Agrayana (cup) is the breast as it
Pitrs [5]. 'Here (may) I (be free) from Varuna's noose', he says; verily he is freed from Varuna's noose.
Thou, gold-hued, started like a courser by brave men, art lightly showing forth thy splendour in the streams.
In the breast of the sky, O Agni, he who gazeth on men;
6 That he may send us succour, praise the Waters' Offspring Savitar:
We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven: ye Deities, give us wealth with hero children.
Indra departs with his [1] power, Varuna seizes him with Varuna's noose, who is seized by evil; for him
How wilt thou speak to Earth and bounteous Mitra? What wilt thou say to Aryaman and Bhaga?
the sun in yonder world. Then indeed these worlds became calm. In that he repeats (it) thus, (it serves)
6 Close to thy friendship do we cling, O Indra, and depend, or, thee.
sacrificer; there fore no other brick should be put down higher. He puts down the naturally perforated
May all thy bounteous gifts be gathered up for us, yea, the good gifts of thee the Good.
May Agni, ever wise, with best directions to bliss and highest happiness conduct us.
It spreads abroad when butter hath been offered it, and balmed with streams of butter shines forth like
3 This drop, steer-strong and omniform, the Soma, hath been made ready for the Bull, for India.
For thou art wonderful and true, giver of strength in herds of kine.
May the embryo for me, the calves, the one-and-a-half-year-old male and female, the two-year-old male
1. To the strong Rudra bring we these our songs of praise, to him the Lord of Heros with the braided
I. Here is the Soma juice expressed: O Vasu, drink till thou art full!
higher sacrifice condescends to him [5]. (He should cut one) of six cubits for one who desires support;
May we divide the wealth of him whom thou hast slain: bring us, Unreachable, his goods.
When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma became his own entire possession.
3 E'en now endures thine exploit of the Rivers, when, Indra, for their floods thou clavest passage.
4 These songs praise Savitar whose tongue is pleasant, praise him whose arms are full, whose hands
Bring hither with his Bays the Lord of Soma: here is glad welcome for the Bounteous Giver.
They into whom Vaisvanara Agni entered, here let those Waters, Goddesses, protect Me.
Asvins, the Rishi is prepared, your worshipper, with songs of praise. Lovers of sweetness, hear my call!
So bring Most Youthful One, the Gods' asserrigly, the Heavenly Host which thou to-day shalt honour.
10 He took the plants and days for his possession; he gained the forest trees and air's mid-region.
the most agreeable, the best of carriers, the best caller of the gods.
O'er the whole riches of this man they, the Adityas, have control.
3 Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, splendid, with heavenly lustre, hath shone out
2 This shrine have we made ready for thy coming, as the fond dame attires her for her husband.
twenty-four syllables, splendour is the Gayatri; verily by the Gayatri he secures splendour for him. He
to the Hotr, a horse to the Prastotr and Pratihartr, twelve heifers to the Brahman, a cow to the
Wherewith ye helped the hero Manu with new strength,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
7 O Agni, as thou burnest down to earth even high-grown underwood,
1. A male has sprung from a male, the asvattha (ficus religiosa) from the khadira (acacia catechu). May this slay
3 From thee a Bull but newly born, O Agni, the kindled everlasting flames rise upward.
When the first-born of holy Law approached me, then of this speech I first obtain a portion.
7 Now whether thou be far away, or in the heavens, or on the earth,
15 Now let your Soma juice be poured; be not afraid, O Kali's sons.
with that for Soma he impregnates seed [1], with that for Pusan he propagates. There is one for
4 Pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal lords,
'Be 'pure for the winning of strength', this is the Anustubh strophe; three Anustubhs make four Gayatris;
the two seasons called the end. They should consecrate themselves on the full moon in Phalguni. The
13 Glory to Gods, the mighty and the lesser glory to Gods the younger and the elder!
Indra takes notice of that wish, and the Ram hastens with his troop.
Attend to this our speech and make it prosper well. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood.
The gods divided the sacrifice on the Agnidh's altar: of what was left over they said, 'Let this remain
before the purchasing of the Soma. If he were to uncover before the purchasing of the Soma, the
There are two ways of refraining from immoral behavior. The first is to refrain from unrighteousness through the exercise of will-power. The second way is to abstain from sin due to fear of God. People who have the ability to abstain from sinning merely by will-power are very few. The majority of people desist from doing wrong due to the fear of punishment. For example, it is observed on highways that the moment a police car is spotted, people immediately slow down to the permissible speed limit, but when they perceive there is no danger of being caught, they do not hesitate in exceeding the speed limit. Thus, if we believe in God, out of fear of him we will refrain from immoral behavior. Instead, if we do not believe in God, all his laws will still be applicable to us, and we will suffer the consequences of wrong-behavior.Those with demoniac natures do not wish to accept this imposition of authority and regulation of behavior that is a necessary corollary of belief in God. Instead, they prefer to subscribe to the view that there is no God and the world has no basis for moral order. They propagate ideas such as the “Big Bang Theory,” which postulates that the world was created by an accidental explosion that took place at time zero of creation, and thus there is no God who sustains the world. Such theories permit them to engage in sensual gratification without scruples or fear of consequences.Amongst the various forms of sensual gratification, sexual indulgence is the most intense. This is because the material realm is like a distorted reflection of the spiritual realm. In the spiritual realm, divine love is the basis of the activities of the liberated souls and their interactions with God. In the material realm, its distorted reflection, lust, dominates the consciousness of materially conditioned souls, particularly those under the mode of passion. Thus, the demoniac-minded see engagement in lustful activities as the purpose of human life.
9. O Indra and Agni, and Kâma, having formed an alliance, do ye hurl down my enemies; when they have fallen
Do thou, O Indra,. give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
thousand cattle. He who knowing thus offers the five-night rite obtains a thousand cattle. Babara
6 May we be friends of one like thee, O Indra, with the wealth of kine,
Vasus, the gods, as deity, with the Gayatri metre I yoke thee, with the spring season as oblation I
4 Let them prepare the altar, let them kindle fire in front: we two
So may we win for us strength. O Vaisvanara, hundredfold, thousandfold, O Agni, by thy help.
9 When he, the Mighty, ne'er o'erthrown, steadfast, made ready for the fight,
Who whirls the dust on high, alone, oerthrower, hath made all races of mankind his subjects.
8 Merrily sports their troop, the three-and-fifty, like Savitar the God whose ways are faithful.
a Thou art the hospitality of Agni. For Visnu thee! Thou art the hospitality of Soma. For Visnu thee!
Who went on various ways and brought us vigour, ye who are undeceivable explorers.
3 Bringing good tidings, Bird of happy omen, call thou out loudly southward of our dwellings,
3 Approach ye and be near to us. drink, O ye Asvins, of the meath.
Place swiftly nigh us for our help: be it thy will that it be strong.
Prajapati had thirty-three daughters; he gave them to Soma, the king; of them he associated with Rohini;
3 Thou, Indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steeds and kine:
7. Agni is head and height of heaven, the master of the earth is he
26. O Prâna, be not turned away from me, thou shalt not be other than myself! As the embryo of the waters (fire),
8 He in his might surveyed the floods containing productive force and generating Worship.
26 Ye carry on your bodies, ye who see it all: so bless us graciously therewith.
cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the strong; verily he has recourse to Agni, the strong, with his own
7 Thou speedest down to succour us this ever-conquering God of yours,
O Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma set before thee.
23 Even as Vyatya did, may we with these most high and liberal hymns
h May the two Ankas, the two Nyankas, which are on either side of the chariot,
When I have seen you, Matuts, in gay splendour, ye have delighted me, so now delight me.
2 At eve and morn thy pious servants bring thee their precious gifts, O Priest of many aspects,
Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from her, O Indra, thou and Agni.
As thirst subdueth in the desert, conquer thou, O Soma Pavarnana, men of evil thoughts.
harmonised. He holds the heavens and the earth, he fills the teacher with creative fervour (tapas).
5 Stream to us food and vigour, kine and horses: give us broad lights and fill thGods with rapture.
The food to which all Deities and mortals, calling it meath, gather themselves together.
offer to him of the team, the sacrificer would go mad; (an offering) is made to him of the team, to
6 Aided by thee, O Agni may we conquer through our oblation, fain for wealth, awakened:
constituents is the whole of the sacrifice [2]; verily with the whole of the sacrifice he bewitches him, and
is connected with the Brhati, and therefore on the sixth day the Çukra is drawn; verily he draws it in its
19 Give us not up, Agni, to want of heroes, to wretched clothes, to need, to destitution.
17 Even, Indra, that carouse which slays the Vrtras best, most widely famed,
13 Maruts, the man whom ye have guarded with your help, he verily in strength surpasseth all mankind.
19 The sages skilled in holy song and thin. kers with their thoughts have urged
When days shone bright the Sage made him a singer, while the heavens broadened and the Dawns
24 A thousand and a hundred Steeds are harnessed to thy golden car.
4 Our friends extol him like a steed for vigour even Agni in the dwelling, jatave~as.
having made requital of the loan to Yama, he goes freed from the debt to the world of heaven. If he does
That it may cheer the God to gracious favour, and keep far from us hatred and affliction.
6 Approach, O Indra, hasting thee, Lord of Bay Horses, to the prayers.
foundation, the horses in the stable I have caused to stand.
7. Wcll have they eaten and rejoiced; the friends have risen and passed away:
1. Yea, cause our hymn to gain for us cattle and steeds and store of wealth,
Tvastr, his son slain, offered Soma excluding Indra. Indra desired an invitation to the rite, but he did not
31 We venerate with cheerful hearts the cheerful Agni, dear to all,
3. Help us in battles Indra, in battles where thousand spoils are gained,
Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest, thou art Indra of true force [1]. O Brahman! Thou, O king, art the
A consecrated wave he now will give you, so press for him the Soma rich in sweetness.
Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he obtains the sacrifice. He anoints a limited
Slaying both kinds of foe, may we, O Hero, be happy, helped by thee, with ample riches.
smite away the fetid odour. When a battle is joined he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni,
3. He, being purified, hath made the mornings shine, and it is he who gave the rivers room to flow.
3 He bent his eye upon the dying Mother: My word I now withdraw. That way I follow.
13 Valiantly didst thou seize and take the store which Susna had amassed,
O Arise to the sky, aim at the atmosphere, be united with the earth;
8 Yea, that most excellent carouse, Indra, which slays most enemies,
4.6.83 Sukta 83 – Charm against curing Scrofulous Sores called Apakit
4 Four bear him up and give him rest and quiet, and ten invigorate the Babe for travel.
3 Or may our Indra here, the Friend of all mankind, coming from heaven, most.wise, girt by the Marut
1. Let none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us!
5 So, Agni, send us wealth among the people: may we be closely knit to thee, O Victor,
11 Thou comest, fain to succour him, with Kutsa,-a goad that masters both the Wind-God's horses,
Girt by the Maruts, gladdening, Steeds with Indra's stiength, for wisdom and for dainty food.
1. TURN, go not farther on your way: visit us, O ye Wealthy Ones.
that year, he pierces the Soma-seller with darkness. 'O Svana [4], Bhraja', he says; they indeed in yonder
goat-hair; the female goat is Agni's dear form; verily he unites him with his dear form, and thus with
l Ye are food, making sweetness; kindly enter me, nourishment and drink; may I prosper with your
3. Not for a moment only lasts thy bounty, Lord of many men:
4 Like spokes of car-wheels in one nave united, ever victorious like heavenly Heroes,
3 Whose resolute assault, to win vigour and food, deserves our praise,Through whose discovering power the priest obtaineth wealth.
of the fire. Thrice again he goes round; they make up six, the seasons are six; verily with the seasons he
Blazing amid dry plants, snatching amid the green, the Strong, the Holy Herald hath attained to heaven.
1. By men hath Indra been advanced, the Vritra-sIayer, to joy and strength.
10. The amulet which Brihaspati tied wearing that amulet Kandramas (the moon) conquered the golden cities of
wild with the knee-cap; clay with the gums; Avaka grass with pieces of gravel; with the Avakas gravel;
1. Do ye well offer within the fire this oblation with ghee, that destroys the spook! Do thou, O Agni, burn from afar
a Let thy mind with the mind, let thy breath with the breath (of the gods be united).
3 These deeds he did; let him achieve new exploits, such as the priests declare at their libations.
9 Whether the simple or the sage, Indra, have offered praise to thee,
9 O Soma Pavamana, give us riches and heroic strength,Indu! with. Indra for ally.
4 From thee the hero springs who wins the booty, bringer of help, mighty, of real courage.
Bestow on us what wealth he hath: this even the worshipper awaits.
4 Send thou with hymns that Agni to his own abode, who rules, one Sovran Lord of wealth, like Varuna,
He who desiring a village desires, 'May I be the back of my equals', should offer to Brhaspati (a beast)
Foe-conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, with mighty bow, shooting with well-laid arrows.
2 I should be fain, O Lord of Power, to strengthen and enrich the sage,
Even as in time of old with might thou slewest, so slay even now our enemy, O Indra.
2 Ye, O Nasatyas, mount that early-harnessed Car, that travels early, laden with its freight of balm,
in the last month. They say, 'In the case of a cow which they milk thrice a day, she yields sparingly at
Who urged the high and mighty sky to motion, the Star of old, and spread the earth before him.
g From afar to thee, slayer of cows, and slayer of men,
The Heaven and the Earth by Varuna's decree, unwasting, rich in germs, stand parted each from each.
with the sacrificers, the lord of the sacrifice with his prayer', he says; verily he causes the lord of the
Sauddsas. Those, who knowing thus perform (the rite) of forty-nine nights, win offspring and defeat
3. That yonder man shall long for me, (but) I for him nevermore, ye gods, send forth the yearning love: may
Accordant, of One mind with Surya and with Dawn, -the presser's Soma, Asvins drink.
(chaplains) shall turn back for me (upon the sorcerer) the sorceries with aggressive amulets!
At this new gift, with this laud sung before thee, extolling thee, we, Indra, will declare it.
some not; those which he besprinkles he delights; those which he does not besprinkle he delights by
Fill thyself full, O Maghavan, for gain of kine, full, Indra, for the gain of steeds.
6 First, Indra-Agni, hath this Maid come footless unto those with feet.
and arrived with the second [1]. The first day is the Abhiplava, the second the complete (gati). The first
For thee a new hymn, Lord of Bays! is fashioned. May we, car-borne, through song be victors ever.
(while yet) young its mother nourishes; this, as soon as born, surveys all the worlds.
22. May Indra who bestows welfare, the lord of the people, the slayer of Vritra, the controller of enemies, he that
it. Then indeed he became a speaker of speech. He, who knowing thus offers the five-night rite, becomes
(serpent); to wrath the viper; the pot-nosed, the lotus-sitter, the copper snake, these are for Tvastr; to the
7 Best Sacrificer, bring the Gods, O Agni, to the pious man:
So may I gain your shelter and protection as with winged course a hero seeks his army.
Thou casting off thine infant wrappings blazest forth as though thou hadst put on a coat of mail for war.
9 Yea, who alone is called the Lord, the single Ruler of the folk,
Thou art the hundred-wintered Ila to give strength, Lord of Wealth! Vrtra-slayer and Sarasvati.
In this verse, Shree Krishna says that there are four categories of people who do not surrender to Him:1. The Ignorant.People who lack spiritual knowledge and do not know anything about the soul being eternal and that its ultimate goal is God-realization. They have never heard about these concepts or aware of the process of surrendering to God.2. The lazy.These are the ones who have the knowledge and awareness of what they need to do still, due to their lazy-nature do not want to take any initiative to surrender. Laziness can be a big pitfall for someone on the path of spirituality.There is a Sanskrit saying:ālasya hī manuṣhyāṇāṁ śharīrastho mahān ripuḥnāstyudyamasamo bandhuḥ kṛitvā yaṁ nāvasīdati“Laziness is a big enemy, and it resides; in our body itself. Work is a good friend of humans, which never leads to downfall.”3. Deluded Intellects.People who are so proud of their intellects that they have no faith in the scriptures and the teachings of the saints. Because they do not have faith, they are unable to practice surrender or understand the concepts of God-realization.4. Demonic Nature.These are the people who are aware of God and His purpose for the world but still work against Him. It is because of their demonic nature; they do not like God and His glories. They themselves are far from devotion and try to disturb others who are on the path of spirituality. Surrender to Godis not at all expected from them.
Agai was thy third husband: now one bornof woman is thy fourth.
3 This God while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed for war, by men
5 May we be they who gratify Agni with sacrificial gifts,
Thou art the King of men, of all that liveth, engendering at once Sun, Heaven, and Morning.
Come to the man even as his heart desireth: may we enjoy your most delightful favour.
2. O Agni, the Angirasas discovered thee what time thou layest hidden, fleeing back from wood to
Keep at a distance penury and sickness; Lovers of Sweetness, day and night preserve us.
8. Protect me with a hundredfold, guard me with a thousandfold (strength)! Indra, the strong, shall put strength
15. The share of food that belongs to you of yore has been set aside for you. Instructed by the Rishis bring thou
but he who offers the sacrifice does so with the wish, 'May it be in my vital airs. If they omit the
1. To this mine invocation, O ye Asvins, ye Nasatyas, come,
1. So, Indra, friend of song, do we draw near to thee with longing; we have streamed to thee
14 Come unto us with riches, come with wealth in horses and in kine.
vow extends not beyond the year; verily [4] his own deity, being sacrificed to, kindles him with
5 Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, Wonder-Workers, and in growing plants,
upon which, after he has reached the fullest age, he shall ascend to the highest firmament, the supreme heavens!
Invite thee to their worship-halls, as a dear Priest, for choicest wealth.
1. OF one accord, with Indra, O ye Rudras, come borne on your golden car for our prosperity.
verily he produces offspring, for him. By that for Indra he wins power, by that for the Maruts the people,
When thou, Impetuous! leagued with Visnu, slewest Vrtra the Dragon who enclosed the waters.
3 Hero of Heroes, Agni! Thou art Indra, thou art Visnu of the Mighty Stride, adorable:
sprung from seers; therefore he says thus. 'Gaze on the heaven, gaze on the atmosphere', he says; verily
7 As soon as, at libations of his mother, great Visnu had drunk up the draught, he plundered.
7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and none may shoot at him,
As he imparts all vigour to these people, straightway the folk bend them to him the Godlike.
12 To us, ye Lords of ample wealth, and to our wealth chiefs extend
10.9.1, 10.9.2, 10.9.3, 10.9.4, 10.9.7, 10.14.8, 10.18.8, 10.27.12, 10.31.2, 10.32.7, 10.34.3, 10.34.13,
4 Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, as such, to send your cars:
from the plants, protect me from the past, as well as the future; may he protect us from every direction of space!
cow, terrible in the house of him that refuses to give her.
4 Thee, thee Most Glorious One we make our messenger. Bring the Gods hither to the feast.
21 Thou, Agni, as in days of old, with recent glory, gathered light,
worse. He who (performs) in accordance with the deities does not fall a victim to the deities, he becomes
[6], what is above the girdle up to the top to the All-gods, the top to Indra, the rest to the Sadhyas. The
[3], (with these words) he strikes (the earth) together, for firmness. 'Be pure for the gods; be bright for
6. As birds start in fear from the eagle, as by day and by night (they start) at the roar of the lion, thus do thou, O
18 To bring the blind man joy thus cried the she-wolf: O Asvins, O ye Mighty Ones, O Heroes,
thou art might [1], thou are blazing, thou art by name the home of the gods, thou art all, of all life thou
Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth, and blessing, O ye Maruts, for the gain of
This one at the station of the brown (sun) did attain unto the worlds of light.
propagated. 'Thou art the ray; for dwelling thee! Quicken the dwelling' [1], he says; the dwelling is the
vessel which holds the purified Soma verily he renders continuous the Pavamana, he lives all his days;
2 Visit, to prove us free from sin, O Surya Lord of great might, the bright Gods sprung from Daksa,
knowing thus perform (the rite) of thirty six nights, discern the world of heaven, and go to the world of
1. SERVED with oblations, first-born, mountain-render, Angiras' son, Brhaspati, the Holy,
2. Even him, the swift one, like a bull who rushes down men's conqueror, bounteous like a cow;
12. Reverence be to Yama, reverence to death; reverence to the Fathers and to those that lead (to them) [death's
23 The Dawns he wedded to a glorious Consort, and set within the Sun the light that lights him.
times; verily he delights four-footed cattle; twice again he says, 'For the season'; verily he delights twofooted (cattle). 'Give directions for the season', six times he says; 'For the seasons', four times; therefore
the Hotr addresses the Adhvaryu, he puts fear in him; if be were not to smite it off [4], they would have
4 Cleansing thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest in a watery robe:
7 If now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth,
support, and conquers all the quarters. The Brahman is connected with Agni, therefore the Brahman
3. And now that thou, O Pavamana, art above this earth and heaven and all existence in thy might,
Nor, Son of Strength, to lack of cattle, nor to blame. Drive. thou our enemies away.
12 For thine exalted excellence gives to thy worshippers each day
To whom to the Gods bring oblation quickly? What offerer, God-favoured, knows him thoroughly?
Mighty, all-conquering, the victory-giver, him let us call to grant us new protection.
Indra, victorious, bring thou hither the supplies of those who act as thy enemies!
Karsmarya on the south, the Udumbara on the north; therefore is yonder (sky) higher than this (earth);
heaven. He who removes the fire is the slayer of the hero among the gods; formerly righteous Brahmans
2. Avoid us, O curse, as a burning fire (avoids) a lake! Strike here him that curses us, as the lightning of heaven
with Indra; he buys (it) with a draught ox, the draught ox is the bearer; verily by the bearer he buys the
on me power may Indra bestow; on me wisdom, on me offspring, on me blazing may Surya bestow.
piles Agni in his full extent. He places eight; the Gayatri has eight syllables; the Gayatri knows in truth
wrong, and (his milk) is poured forth in vain. A Soma sacrificer only should offer the Samnayya. Soma
remnants of the mixed (Soma). Then indeed had Rudra no designs against his cattle. When one who
it. The sacrificial cake is offered on five potsherds; the seasons are five; verily he wins it from the
1. BE friendly with each kindled log of fuel, with every flash bestow the boon of riches.
it on) with a Gayatri for a Brahman, for the Brahman is connected with the Gayatri, with a Tristubh for a
t Ye that are in that world, may they follow you; ye that are in this world, may they follow me.
The gods could not find any one to utter the call Svaga at the sacrifice. They spoke to Çamyu
Vayu is Soma's guardian God. The Moon is that which shapes the years.
sacrificer. Now the consecrated person has for long been holding himself ready for the sacrifice. In that
c With clear sight may I gaze' upon thee, O god Soma, who regardest men.
connected with the Jagati; verily at the third pressing he produces the metres in the response; now the
Fast he upheld the earth that nourisheth all life, and stayed the heaven from falling by his wondrous
plant it in the sacrificer. 'Hail! with my mind the sacrifice', he says; for man approaches the sacrifice
King, chase their hatred far away, thou Bounteous One, dispel our foes.
On Varuna and Mitra, on the Asvins, Bhaga, the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas.
offspring, and cattle of the sacrificer; he should pronounce over it the formula, 'Thou hast fallen to me
3 Goats are the team that draws the one: the other hath Bay Steeds at hand;
Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into the rivers from their hands.
7. May we not conflict with Rudra, the archer with the dark crest, the thousand-eyed, powerful one, the slayer of
1. PLEASANT to Indra's Mitra's, Pusan's Bhaga's taste, sped onward, Soma, with thy flowing stream.
into a sorry state.' He replied, 'So shall I act that it will not burn thee excessively.' He stroked it, (saying),
2 O Jatavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flame attack the demons.
2. To him, the bounteous, say the laud, and let us glorify, as men
8 Against the Gungus I made Atithigva strong, and kept him mid the folk like Vrtra-conquering strength,
Wondrously fair, adorable, effulgent, the guest of men, the darling of the people.
not take of stagnant (waters); the stagnant (waters) are seized by Varuna; if he were to take of stagnant
6 Thus like a wise and potent King flow onward, destroying with thy vigour all misfortunes.
6 Thou hast drunk Soma, Indra, turn thee homeward; thy joy is in thy home, thy racious Consort;
grasped it, and sacrificed with it. Then indeed was he able to help offspring, When offspring are
verily in force and strength, and in cattle they find support. They proceed with the Brhat and the
5 O Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were thineNo, not a thousand Suns could match thee at thy birth, not both the worlds, O Thunderer.
46 Loosed is the heavens! support, the uplifted cheering juice: the triply-mingled draught flows round
an oblation of Gavidhuka in the house of the thrower of the dice; the sacrificial fee is a speckled (ox)
4 Be thou for us a liberal Prince, giver and Lord of precious things.
The fellies of your golden chariot scatter drops, Mighty Ones! of your golden car.
1.8.87 Mantra 87 – Indra (Authors: Krsna Angiras, Dyumnika Vasistha, Priyamedha Angiras)
Tamo guṇa is the antithesis of sattva guṇa. Persons influenced by it get pleasure through sleep, laziness, intoxication, violence, and gambling. They lose their discrimination of what is right and what is wrong, and do not hesitate in resorting to immoral behavior for fulfilling their self-will. Doing their duty becomes burdensome to them and they neglect it, becoming more inclined to sloth and sleep. In this way, the mode of ignorance leads the soul deeper into the darkness of ignorance. It becomes totally oblivious of its spiritual identity, its goal in life, and the opportunity for progress that the human form provides.
18 Let us declare the Hero's wealth in horses, O all ye folk: of this the Gods have knowledge.
When heroes, foe to foe, give up their bodies, fighting, each side, for children and their offspring.
18 His pair of horses, rushing on in their wild transport, draw his car:
10 Now, O ye Sapient Ones, make ye the axes sharp wherewith ye fashion bowls to hold the Amrta.
1. Sing forth unto your Varuna and Mitra with a song inspired:
Two Birds of mighty power are seated near her, there where the Deities receive their portion.
He puts down the metre bricks; the metres are cattle; verily he wins cattle; the good thing of the gods,
flow Effused, the source of Indra's joy: may you strong juices reach the Gods!
22 Priest-like, with praise, I move around the altar, earning Paijavana's reward, O Agni,
7 Him with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved of all,
three, man is threefold in arrangement; verily he removes by sacrifice Nirrti from the whole extent of
on both sides; therefore the eyes are on either side of the nose; therefore the eyes are held apart by the
singers of hymns, the response for the Adhvaryus. He, who knowing thus responds, becomes an eater of
Dharmic Scriptures team will be continually reviewing and modifying translations to reflect BOTH the
6 The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein the Gods were gathefed all together.
To Indra, the king, are (to be offered) three white-backed; to Indra, the overlord, three with white
'Agnidh, draw off the fires, spread the strew, make ready the sacrificial cake.' Verily having re-won the
6. If when asleep thou shalt behold an evil dream; as often as a wild beast shall run an inauspicious course; from
moreover in that he repeats the triad (of verses), (it serves) for continuity. Because of the Garhapatya
he should offer these libations to Sarasvant and Sarasvati in front; Sarasvati is the new moon; verily he
25 With, undiminished blessings, O ye Asvins, for evermore both night and day protect us.
sacrificer, the mortar offspring; if he were to pile it with three layers, he would obstruct the sacrifice, the
verily he avoids destruction; 'May (my act) as I work not perish', he says; verily he attains prosperity.
May Urvasi in lofty heaven accepting, as she partakes the oblation of the living,
resort to him to whom the sacrifice does not resort. He puts Dhatr first; verily in his mouth he places the
the Soma is bought is cattle; he pours (the dust of the footprint) so far as it is mixed with the ghee; verily
By what self power moves he? Who liath seen it? He guards the vault of heaven, a close-set pillar.
1. After his ancient splendour, they, the bold, have drawn the bright milk from
3. With inspiration follow ye this strong hero; cling close, ye friends, to Indra (the king), who conquers villages,
2. With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with power hath indra lighten up the Sun. In
23 Come, Indra, and rejoice thyself, O God, in manifold affluence.
3 Strong is the thought of Law, the Law's behest; all works have they performed; he quickens all.
5 These with their truthful spirit, shining brightly, move on provided with their natural insight.
9. Where art thou? Whither art thou gone? For many a place attracts thy mind.
Many fiends follow me; help me, thou Tawny-hued; pass on beyond these barriers.
2 Bull, hurler of the four-edged rain-producer with both his arms, strong, mighty, most heroic;
Quickly made manifest, the Bull hath bellowed, engendering the germ of plants, the Infant.
potsherds to Agni, the brilliant [3]; verily he has recourse to Agni, the brilliant, with his own share;
Whatever the gods did at the sacrifice the Asuras did. The gods caused the metres and the pressings to
(verses) he takes up the spade; the metres are four; verily (he takes it up) with the metres. 'On the
That, splendid, chasing sickness, slaying demons, it may delight our friend and bless the singers.
2. The speaker, unassailable master of this prayer, the tongue of sacrifice, pours forth the pleasant
Aided by thee the Rsi Dasyave-vrka strove to obtain thousands of kine.
May this cow yield her milk for both the Asvins, and may she prosper to our high advantage.
May our prayer be victorious in battles, may we have rain from heaven to make us prosper.
Men yearn for children to prolong their line, and are not disappointed in their hope.
2. Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent unhallowed, tread us to the ground!
God, make our home again to be a b1ess ing, with all the Immortal Deities, O Holy.
3 Thou, Pusan, in whose friendship they who sing forth praise enjoy advantage, even in wisdom,
exhausted, the Raksases do not destroy the sacrifice. 'Well born with light', (with these words) he ties up
62. Thy laps, O earth, free from ailment! Free from disease, shall be produced for us! May we attentively, throuoh
7 Not with the wealthy churl who pours no Soma doth Indra, Soma-drinker, bind alliance.
24 And, Indra, grant us all that wealth of fleet steeds which shone bright of old
2. As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way mad with
23 For as sagacious Herald he hath sat through every age of man,
6. This person here, O kushtha, restore for me, and cure him! Render him free from sickness for me!
Whatever, Maruts! may be difficult to gain, grant us, whate'er is hard to gain.
4. And now, sent forth, he hath attained to mighty power and majesty,
5 O Hero, Lord of Bounties, praised in hymns, may power and joyfulness
2. Four directions has the heaven, and also four the earth: (from these) the gods created the embryo. May they
9 Ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks; like buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed.
9 The mighty sage, God-born and God-incited, who looks on men, restrained the billowy river.
14 Who aids with favour him who pours the Soma and him who brews it, sacrificer, singer.
Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for Varuna.
potsherds to Agni and Visnu, to Sarasvati an oblation, to Sarasvant on twelve potsherds. In that it is
and the sacrificer would be without cattle. 'Thee offered to the lord of speech I eat', he says; verily
2 This, dealt from heaven ' may both the Worlds vouchsafe us, and Varuna, Indra, Aryaman, and Mitra.
When at the hurling of his bolt he smote him, he made him lower than all living creatures.
7 Hear thou Syavagva while he pours to thee, as erst thou heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites.
cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the protector; verily he has recourse to Indra, the protector, with his
That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A thousand flames had he who bore the tawny-hued.
1. WHERE hath the hymn with reverence, like an envoy, found both fair Gods to-day, invoked of manyHymn that hath brought the two Nasatyas hither? To this man's thought be ye, both Gods, most
Where the stone rings as'twere a singer skilled in laud, --Indra in truth delights when these come near
7 Ne'er may this bond of friendship be dissevered, the Rsi Vimada's and thine, O Indra.
the Viraj he secures food for him. He should repeat thirty-two, for one who desires support; the
Broughtest the face unclouded of the strengthening one, performing much even now, worthy art thou of
26 I would not give thee up, Vasu, to calumny, or misery, O Bounteous One.
From the right hand, choosing the Gods' attendance, he with rich presents hath arranged the worship.
born. 'Go to god Savitr, hail!' he says; verily, instigated by Savitr, he begets offspring for him. 'Go to day
O Vayu, on refulgent car come to the drinking of the juice.
8 O Asvins, may your car approach, most excellent of cars for speed.
win both. He anoints with a large handful (of grass); the large handful is connected with Prajapati [2];
12 Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, triumpliant; thy hosts save from decay and are resistless.
Which his two Tawny Coursers draw, then Indra is the Sovran Lord of power whose glory spreads afar.
he repels his foes. He should pile in triangle form on both sides, who desires, 'May I repel the foes I
they win power and strength at the end of the sacrifice. They sing the Sattra syarddhi (Saman) at the end
indeed are the nights of the half-month, the year is made up of half-months, the world of heaven is the
3 Juice in wide room hath been prepared to feast you: for you the grass is strewn, most soft to tread on.
12 Come now, O Gods, to your celestial station: the Bharadvajas' priest entreats your favour.
burn forth; the gods found him by the offerings in the after-sacrifices; in that he offers the afterAno Bhadraha Kritavayo Yantu Vishwataha (Let noble thoughts come from every side) – Rg Veda
bull and a cow. The blood which fell Rudra seized; it became a fierce red cow. He who desires
2. The Morning knows all precious things, the Goddess knows her grace to man:
11 Agni, preceder of the Gods, is honoured with the sacred song:
world of heaven. They surround it from above with the Para (Samans), and descend with the Prsthas. If
of seed. Or rather they say, 'If he were not to have intercourse, there would be no offspring.' In that he
our cattle.' They praised Agni; be praised by them delivered their cattle from night to day; the gods
Considering his behavior as transgressions toward God, Arjun is asking for pardon. While interacting with Shree Krishna—playing, eating, jesting, talking, and resting—he did not show the respect that is appropriate toward the Supreme Almighty. However, no one minds transgressions when they are made because of a high level of intimacy shared with the other person. No government officer has the privilege to joke with the President of a country. Yet, the President’s personal friend, teases him, jests with him, and even scolds him. The President does not mind, rather he values that jest of an intimate friend more than all the respect he receives from his subordinate officers. Thousands of people salute an army general, but they are not as dear to his heart as his wife, who sits intimately by his side. Similarly, Arjun’s intimate dealings with Shree Krishna were not transgressions; they were gestures of the depth of his loving devotion in the sentiment of being a friend. Yet, a devotee is by nature humble, and so, out of humility, he feels that he may have committed transgressions, and hence he is asking for forgiveness.
dear to Agni. Now he who steps the strides of Visnu is apt as he goes away to be burnt up; he turns with
2. High in the seat of heaven is placed the scorcher's sieve: its, threads are standing separate, glittering
Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter, and let our pious one rest in the pitcher.
56. He who kicks a cow with his foot, and he who micturates towards the sun--of thee do I tear out the root; thou
prospered, the Asuras were defeated. He who has enemies should offer this offering after performing the
Agni. 'In the wealth of earth I place thee', he says; verily with these (bricks) he makes these worlds
thirty-three gods attend them mayest thou, (O cattle), guide us to the heavenly world!
5. On flows the potent juice, sustainer of the heavens; the strength of Gods, whom men must hail with shouts of
7 O Indra, thou shalt speak us fair: our holy prayer is offered up.
3 Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splendour of the Sun adorn it.
4 Your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye, Heroes, grant your gifts.
Thou, yielding Indra highest joy, takest thy seat within the bowls.
30 Hither, O thou whom many laud, the Bays whom Priyamedha praised,
8 Even now he breathed: these days hath he remembered. Concealed, he sucked the bosom of his
Uninjured dwell together still, and conquer those who fight with us.
11 When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold these herbs within my hand,
The gods and the Asuras were in conflict; the gods said, 'Let us hold on to the strongest of us'; they said
7 Horses whose hoofs rain dust are neighing loudly, yoked to the Chariots, showing forth their vigour,
She who at night-time with her argent lustre hath shown herself e'en through the shades of darkness.
5. I unite with thee Indra who has supremacy, through whom one conquers and is not (himself) conquered, who
Herein established, joined in pairs together, seven hundred Sons and twenty stand, O Agni.
2 He smites the trees apart, he slays the demons: all life fears him who wields the mighty weapon.
Tell me, Unconquerable Lord, and quickly sinless will I approach thee with mine homage.
3 Thou, Hero, winner of the spoil, urgest to speed the car of man.
3 Son of these Parents, he the Priest with power to cleanse, Sage, sanctifies the worlds with his
He who comes wielding in his might the thunder, Maghavan, gives prayer, praise, and laud, and Soma.
on eight potsherds to Agni, the radiant; verily he has recourse to Agni, the radiant, with his own share;
15 May we, seven sages first in rank, engender, from Dawn the Mother, men to be ordainers.
3. Purify him who gives us power, most blissful one, that he may be
(havis) with a Rc; by that means he supports those with incisors on both sides. The Puronuvakya
Since thou, O Dawn, hast been beheld repairing as to thy love, as one no more to leave him.
4. Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of the kine,
sacrificial strew is offspring, the altar is the earth; verily he places offspring on the earth. He strews it so
7 Well didst thou do that hero deed, O Indra, in waking with thy bolt the slumbering Ahi.
thunderbolt he hurls it at his foe, to lay him low. 'Having made the great pan', (with these words) he
18 Let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle; may Aditi cast off the evildoers.
Enouncing faith, King Soma! thou, O Soma, whom thy maker decks. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
10 The Brahmans, and the Fathers meet for Soma-draughts, and, graciously inclined, unequalled
cement of the layers; in that he puts down the seasonal (bricks), (it is) to keep apart the layers. He puts
Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Maruts: make Heaven and Earth rejoice, O God, O Soma!
4 When from the Highest Father he is brought to us, amid the plants he rises hungry, wondrously.
7 Traversing sky and wide mid-air, thou metest with thy beams our days,
1. HONOUR the King with thine oblations, Yama, Vivasvan's Son, who gathers men together,
animal is offered to Vayu, therefore he does not depart; in that a cake is offered to Prajapati, therefore he
For Agni the first rib; for Sarasvati the second; for Soma the third; for the waters the fourth; for the
3 This Indra is our gracious Friend. He sends us in a full broad stream
The third is he whose back with oil is sprinkled. Here I behold the Chief with seven male children.
2 I sing to cattle and to Earth, to trees, to Dawns, to Night, to plants.
1. Through this oblation, that causes prosperity, may this man flourish anew; may he excel the wife that they have
f That form of thine, O Agni, which rests in iron, which rests in silver, which rests in gold, the highest,
potsherds; to Pusan an oblation; to Rudra an oblation; to Agni Vaiçvanara (offering) on eight potsherds;
desire of a man, 'May his food be similar (to what he has now)', he should put them down for him at a
interest. 'With Pusan as fellow', he says; Pusan is the leader together of roads; (verily it serves) for
the breaths; he deposits (it near) an ant-heap pierced in seven places; the breaths in the head are seven;
5 I gave up Mrgaya to Srutarvan as his prey because he ever followed me and kept my laws.
He ran up to these two in reverence; they said, 'Let us choose a boon; let us be the appointers of portions
5 He is a wild thing of the flood and forest: he hath been laid upon the highest surface.
many are the gods; verily he draws it for them all. 'This is thy birthplace; to the All-gods thee!' he says,
d Thou art the self-ruling, the northern quarter; the All-gods are thine overlords, Varuna stayeth missiles
concludes the sacrifice in the sacrifice. Prajapati created offspring, he thought himself empty, he saw
8 Arrangers in our synods, Agni, while they sang Vasisistha s sons have called thee down, the Potent
p Of pure radiance, of varied radiance, of true radiance, the radiant, true, protector of holy order, beyond
That in thy joy thou maysi scatter thy gifts o'er us, plenteously, even as the dust.
thinking, 'I have sinned.' The gods sought to start him. Prajapati said, I He who first finds him will have
8. O Pavamana bring us wealth bright with a thousand splendours; yea,
4 I have begotten this new hymn for Agni, Falcon of the sky:
9. Pressed for the gladdening draught the drops flow forth abundantly with song, flow onward with the stream of
6 Vouchsafe to us, O Asvin Pair, such strength as, with attendant light,
Streams flowed for folk of Gotama who thirsted, like rain to bring forth thousandfold abundance.
5 O Satakratu, Lord of Strength, O Indra, Caster of the Stone.
11 We call youi such, great Maruts, following wonted ways, to the oblation paid to Visnu Speeder-on.
Kine which Brhaspati, and Soma, Rsis, sages, and pressing-stones have found when hidden.
8 Ille tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit, tunc discedens pusillaximis huc profectus est. Quasi
21 O Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm,
offer to the Açvins a twin cow; verily he has recourse to the Açvins with their own share; verily they
16 Princes, who, when I asked their kin, named Prsni as their Mother-cow,
5 Cast down from heaven on high thy bolt of thunder wherewith in joy thou smitest dead the foeman.
3. Since ye have been invoked, O teeth, be ye in unison kind and propitious! Elsewhere, O teeth, shall pass away
8 Vrtra they smote and slew, and made the earth and heaven and firmament a wide abode.
should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the bestower; verily he has recourse to Indra, the
2 O Indu, while they cleanse thee bring, O Soma, doubly-waxing wealth
the Visnu (bricks); in that he piles the fire with bricks, and Viçvakarman is this (earth), verily he puts
Varuna would seize him; if he were not to partake, he would have no cattle, but Varuna would not seize
As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his. great errand, suddenly grew strong.
This thine appropriate food is here poured out for thee: come, hasten forward. drink of it,
and piles it up; verily in the Viraj he obtains the sacrifice; the piling up must be repeated by him.
4 Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath coveted, that rapid courser:
Now hath he come, sweet, robed in vital vigour, and made our calling on the Gods effective.
h May I be victorious through the victory of Indra and Agni.
3 Sweet be the plants for us. the heavens, the waters, and full of sweets for us be air's mid-region.
2 We pray thee, thou who droppest oil, bright-rayed! who lookest on the Sun,
1. GLADLY accept, this day, our fuel, Agni: send up thy sacred smoke and shine sublimely.
9 Bestowing on us here riches and offspring, here fashion fame for us befitting heroes.
mind is gone should look at (it), (saying), 'That mind of mine which hath gone away, or which hath gone
7 Thee, Hero, guardian of the brave in battles, who roamest in the van,-to draw thee hither,
2 The mighty powers wherewith. ye formed the chalices, the thought by which ye drew the cow from out
produced one cow. They gave it to the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas, saying 'Guard it.' The Vasus,
9 The hare hath swallowed up the opposing razor: I sundered with a clod the distant mountain.
When we do our swa-dharma (prescribed occupational duties), there is a two-fold advantage. It is in tune with our disposition. Hence, it is as natural to our personality as flying is to a bird and swimming is to a fish. Secondly, since it is comfortable to the mind, it can almost be done involuntarily, and the consciousness becomes free to be engaged in devotion. Instead, if we abandon our duties thinking them to be defective, and take up another’s duties unsuitable for our nature, we struggle against the innate inclination of our personality. This was exactly Arjun’s situation. His Kshatriya nature was inclined to military and administrative activities. Events drove him to a situation where it was necessary to participate in a war of righteousness. If he were to shirk from his duty and withdraw from the battlefield to practice austerities in the forest, it would not help him spiritually, for even in the forest, he would not be able to get away from his inherent nature. In all likelihood, he would gather the tribal people in the jungle and become their king. Instead, it would be better for him to continue doing his duty born of his nature, and worship God by offering the fruits of his works to him. When one becomes spiritually accomplished the swa-dharma changes. It no longer remains at the bodily platform; it becomes the dharma of the soul, which is devotion to God. At that stage, one is justified in giving up occupational duties and engaging wholeheartedly in devotion because that is now the swa-dharma of one’s nature. For people with that eligibility, Shree Krishna will give the final conclusion in the end of the Bhagavad Gita: “Give up all varieties of dharmas and simply surrender unto me.” (18.66) However, until that stage is reached, the instruction given in this verse applies. Thus, the Śhrīmad Bhāgavatam states: tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā mat-kathā-śhravaṇādau vā śhraddhā yāvan na jāyate (11.20.9)[v23] “We must keep doing our prescribed occupational duties as long as the taste for devotion through hearing, chanting, and meditating on the leelas of God has not developed.”
Dawn, thou conferrest on us strength with offspring and men, conspicuous with kine and horses.
With this he should sacrifice who is being practised against; if these deities eat his food, men eat his
1. DRINK the best draught of Soma-juice, O Vayu, at our holy rites:
3 I praise you Guards of mighty Law eternal, Aditi, Mitra, Varuna, the noble,
8. With waters' foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of Namuchi,
2 Strong are the Soma-draughts; come nigh: the juices fill thee with delight:
companionship' [5], he says. By that (the Rc) has the Pitrs for its deity.' 'Every man prayeth for wealth',
Who measured out the air's wide middle region and gave the heaven support, He, men, is Indra.
had three heads, one which drank Soma, one Sura, and one which ate food. He promised openly the
4.8.1 Sukta 1 – Prayer for Exemption from the dangers of Death
9 Yea, e'en that heaven itself of old bent backward before thy bolt, in terror of its anger,
a share. 'Thee offered to the lord of the Sadas I eat', he says, for completion.' (The food) is divided. in
4.1.18 Sukta 18 – Charm to remove Evil bodily characteristics from a Woman
5 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts and guardian of the Soma,
6. He, Indra, verily will mount the powerful car that finds the kine,
1. With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening things, wherewith,
therefore is your name 'shouters' (nadyah rivers'): that is your designation, ye streams!
12 Making his body beautiful, Agni the Sage hath waxen by
barren cows are for Varuna; two bulls with high horns, destructive, are for the sky.
7 For you, as Princes, for your ancient kindness, good comrades of the man who seeks for booty,
world of heaven. He gives to the Agnidh; verily he delights the seasons headed by Agni; he gives to the
12 Sadaprna the holy, Tarya, Srutavit, and Bahuvrkta, joined with you, have slain the foes.
5 Pierce through the Yatudhana's skin, O Agni; let the destroying dart with fire consume him.
Continuing from verse 2.31, Shree Krishna is still giving instructions at the level of occupational duties. He explains to Arjun about the two possibilities arising from the performance of his duty. If Arjun becomes victorious, a kingdom on Earth awaits him, and if he is forced to lay down his life in the discharge of his duty, he will go to the celestial abodes.
The axe is a thunderbolt, the splinter of the sacrificial post is a thunderbolt, the gods by making a
thirteen syllables, but returned without obtaining it; it lost two syllables, but returned with the
Agni, make sacrifices good, and for the pious bring the Gods.
Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Maruts: make Heaven and Earth rejoice, O God, O Soma.
O Drum, accordant with the Gods and Indra, drive thou afar, yea, very far, our foemen.
Yea, let young children sing their lauds: yea, glorify our firm stronghold!
2 Now, Agni, will we say to thee, O wisest and best Afigiras,
10 Roll onward to the bowls, O Mighty One, effused, as Prince supporter of the tribes.
d Knee deep should he pile (it), when piling for the first time; verily with the Gayatri he mounts this
is to-day, the Brhat to-morrow; verily he cuts him off from to-day and to-morrow. The Rathantara is the
As, harnessed to a chariot fleet-foot horses, at his command let bearers lead him forward.
10 Indra is Sovran Lord of Earth and Heaven, Indra is Lord of waters and of mountains.
sap of the metres he wins the sap which is offspring [4]. He who desires food should offer to the Allgods (a cow) of many forms; food is connected with the All-gods; verily he has recourse to the All-gods
with two (verses), for support; when it is not completed by one (verse), then [2] does he stroke; the rest
Lead us not from our fathers' and from Manu's path into the distance far away.
and Vayu is drawn on the next day, where they have seen the sacrifice, thence does he again employ it,
Shree Krishna says that God exists inside all living beings as vaiśhvānara, meaning “fire of digestion,” which is ignited by the power of God. The Bṛihadāraṇyak Upaniṣhad has also stated:ayam agnir vaiśhvānaro yo ’yam antaḥ puruṣheyenedam annaṁ achyate(5.9.1)“God is the fire inside the stomach that enables living beings to digest food.”Thoughthe scientific community has concluded, that the organs of the digestive systemsuch as the stomach, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, etc. secrete digestive juices enabling the digestion of food inliving beings. This revelation by God suggests that such an approach is naïve. It is God’s energy which fires up the digestive process in living beings.Chaturvidham means four types and annam means food. Food is categorized into four types: 1. Bhojya - Foods that are chewed, such as bread, chapatti, etc. 2. Peya - These are mostly liquid or semi-solid foods which we have to swallow or drink, such as milk, juice, etc. 3. Kośhya - Foods that are sucked, such as sugarcane. 4. Lehya - This includes foods that are licked, such as honey, etc.In the last few verses, Shri Krishna has explicated how God supports every aspect of our life. With his energy, He makes the earth habitable, nourishes all vegetation, and even ignites the gastric fire to digest our food. In the next verse, he concludes by stating that He is the master of all knowledge.
A secret is that knowledge which is not accessible to majority of the people. Most of the laws of Physics were a secret until a few centuries ago, and many still continue to remain so. Spiritual knowledge is profound and not realizable through direct perception. It needs to be learnt through the Guru and the scriptures. Hence, it is described as secret. In the second chapter, Shree Krishna had revealed knowledge of the soul, which is guhya, or secret knowledge. In the seventh and eighth chapters, he explained knowledge of his powers, which is guhyatar, or more secret. In the ninth and subsequent chapters, he revealed knowledge of his bhakti, which is guhyatamam, or most secret. In the present chapter, verse 55, he revealed that he can be known in his personal form only by bhakti. Shree Krishna is now concluding the Bhagavad Gita. Having spoken the eighteen chapters, including most secret knowledge to Arjun, he now leaves the choice in Arjun’s hands. He says, “I have revealed to you profound and confidential knowledge. Now the choice is in your hands.” Lord Ram made a similar statement to the residents of Ayodhya. He invited them all for his discourse:eka bāra raghunātha bolāe, guru dwija purabāsī saba āe (Ramayan) [v34]“Once, Lord Ram called all the residents of Ayodhya. Everyone, including Guru Vasishth came to hear him.” In the discourse, Lord Ram explained to them the purpose of human life and the way to accomplish it. In the end, he concluded:nahiṅ anīti nahiṅ kachhu prabhutāī, sunahu karahu jo tumhahi sohāī (Ramayan) [v35]“The advice I have given to you is neither incorrect nor coercive. Listen to it carefully, contemplate over it, and then do what you wish.”This free will to choose between available alternatives has been given to the soul by God. The freedom of choice is not infinite. One cannot decide, “I choose to be the most intelligent person in the world.” Our choices are limited by our past and present karmas. However, we do possess a certain amount of free will, for we are not machines in the hands of God. Sometimes people question that if God had not given us free will then we would not have done any evil. But then we would not have done anything good either. The opportunity to do good always comes with the danger of doing evil. More importantly, God wants us to love him, and love is only possible when there is a choice. A machine cannot love for it does not have any freedom of choice. God created us with free will and provided us with choices so that we may choose him and thereby exercise our love for him. Even the all-powerful God cannot force the soul to love and surrender to him; this decision has to be made by the soul itself. Here, Shree Krishna is calling Arjun’s attention to his free will and asking him to choose.
3 Immortal, wandering round the seven stations, give, a liberal Giver, to the pious worshipper,
Bring us prosperity, as each desires it under thine own protection may we conquer.
verily he places the breaths in the head of the sacrifice; therefore seven are the breaths in the head. He
2 He flows beholding on his way all wellbeloved sacred lore,
ceased, (saying),'We have obtained (our desire).' The year is the cows' Sattra [1], and those who
4 Drink Soma, Indra, banded with the Maruts who, Maghavan, strengthened thee at Ahi's slaughter,
47 Agni, we bring thee, with our hymn, oblation fashioned in the heart.
5 Infallible is Agni, he who goes before the tribes of men,
12 Nightly and daily this one thing they tell me, this too the thought of mine own heart repeateth.
11 They have drained him the Steer of heaven, him with a thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,
9 1 send afar flesh eating Agni, bearing off stains may he depart to Yama's subjects.
5 To Indra Soma flows, the Red, engendering song, exceeding wise,
Accordant, both of you, drive your car down to us, and drink the savoury Soma juice.
swiftly he reaches destruction; it is red, for it has Rudra as its deity; (verily it serves) for prosperity. The
1. RUN onward to the reservoir and seat thee: cleansed by the men speed forward to the battle.
awake. In his place he pays reverence, and therefore cattle returning go to their place.
12 The progeny of Rudra we invoke with prayer, the brisk, the bright, the worshipful, the active Ones
He who hath vanquished Puru in the battle, the heavenly guest hath glowed in full refulgence.
O Maruts, ye disperse all enemies abroad. Their cars moved onward as they went to victory.
They, bearing of themselves, unbar the doors: they all ascend to the fair place of heaven.
[2] with the Brhat and Rathantara's Stoma with the path of the Tristubh,
3. He shall go to the three distances, he shall go beyond the five peoples; he shall go beyond the three ethers,
resort to the lord of the sacrifice', he says; that is according to the text. With the fire he goes in front, to
12 To thee, Strong, Much-invoked, who showest forth thy strength, O Satakratu, do I speak:
35 Borne on that chariot wrought of gold, with coursers very fleet of foot,
9 He knows the pathway of the wind, the spreading, high, and mighty wind
Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, for thy soul longs for Soma juice.
5 To him, to Indra must be sung the poet's word, the hymn of praise.
9 Be gracious to us, fill us full, give, feed us, and invigorate:
seized thee, may these gods remove her by means of their charm!
Cattle belong to Prajapati; their overlord is Rudra. In that he prepares (them) with these two (verses),
9 O ye of true strength, make this thing manifest by your greatness - strike
26. Go away, O spell, do not stand still, track (the enemy) as a wounded (animal)! He is the game, thou the
Arjun speaks for us all when he describes the troublesome mind. It is restless because it keeps flitting in different directions, from subject to subject. It is turbulent because it creates upheavals in one’s consciousness, in the form of hatred, anger, lust, greed, envy, anxiety, fear, attachment, etc. It is strong because it overpowers the intellect with its vigorous currents and destroys the faculty of discrimination. The mind is also obstinate because when it catches a harmful thought, it refuses to let go, and continues to ruminate over it again and again, even to the dismay of the intellect. Thus enumerating its unwholesome characteristics, Arjun declares that the mind is even more difficult to control than the wind. It is a powerful analogy for no one can ever think of controlling the mighty wind in the sky. In this verse, Arjun has addressed the Lord as Krishna. The word “Krishna” means: karṣhati yogināṁ paramahansānāṁ chetānsi iti kṛiṣhṇaḥ [v25] “Krishna is he who forcefully attracts the minds of even the most powerfully-minded yogis and paramahansas.” Arjun is thus indicating that Krishna should also attract his restless, turbulent, strong, and obstinate mind.
4 Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their stream, are the Seven Sisters in the seat of
23. The amulet . . . has come to me together with cows, goats, and sheep, together with food and offspring.
down to the west of the support he (offers) on one potsherd to Nirrti; the sacrificial fee is a black
3 Thou, Mighty, pourest forth the hide that holds the rain, thou keepest far away, Hero, the wicked man,
class he piled its front half, by the lordly class its right wing, by cattle its tail, by the people its left wing,
2 These Brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelting, like a Smith,
Haste ye to honour Trita, as kine haste to gather in the fold, even as they muster steeds to yoke.
potsherds for Agni, the giver, the largest lie should give as a mess to Indra, the bestower, the smallest
Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon: thou leadest
7 Lord – the Excellent and the Beneficent! We invoke you and thank you for the gifts
He dipped his bolt and gave it to him, (saying), 'Slay with it.' He went against (him) with it. Agni and
22 Bring to your Agni, O my friends, boldly your laud and sacrifice:
c Homage to him of braided hair, and to him of plain hair.
1. Thou wishest for thy kine a bull, lord of thy cows whom none may kill,
3 Who claims to-day the Deities' protection, asks Aditi for light, or the Adityas?
Whom the Angirases produced by Fervour,vouchsafe to these, Parjanya, great protection.
m O thou of the three-and-thirtyfold Stoma, lady of the world,
Theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven and this mighty earth which bear rich treasure in
18. Indra slew thy first ancestor, O serpent, and since they are crushed, what strength, forsooth, can be theirs?
6 Whoso, bath flames for thee within his dwelling, or brings the worship which thou lovest daily,
17 Press out the Soma with the stones, and in the waters wash it clean.
Agni with bridegroom's grace and lovely colour may not be touched when all his form is fury.
Shree Krishna said in the previous verse that He is the origin, sustainer, and the basis of all that exists in this world. Now, He continues to explain it further in these four verses.The sweet taste of any fruit that we eat confirms the presence of Fructose or fruit sugar in it. Similarly, Shree Krishna reveals that He is present in all the modifications of His energies. He says He is the taste in water. What does that mean? Water hardly has any taste of its own. Yet, other forms of matter such as solids, fires, and gases need liquids to carry their taste.Have you ever tried putting a solid food item, on your dry tongue? Do you get any taste? Only when the saliva in our mouth dissolves some part of the solid, we start getting the taste as perceived by the taste buds on our tongue. After all, who can separate the taste of water from water? That is why Shree Krishna says that he is the taste in water. It is the intrinsic property of water to carry the taste of all substances; without water, there will be no taste.In the same way, ākāśha (space) acts as the vehicle for sound. Different languages form due to sound modifications. Shree Krishna says He is the origin of it all, as the sound in space is His energy. He is the syllable Om the most important sound in the Vedic mantras. The sun and the moon get their radiance from Him. Even for all the abilities that manifest in humans, He is the ultimate energy source.
goes out after it has been taken out (from the Garhapatya) before the Agnihotra has been offered should
To thy dear name, O Victor, we sing praises: we know the spring from which thou art come hither.
Then in the sacrifice they shouted lauding all triumphs won by Nahus in the battle.
This, shining brightly in the place of Order, swift, hasting on in secret, she discovered.
h May the sun, the god, guard me from trouble from the sky, Vayu from the atmosphere [3], Agni from
food, a strong one is born among his offspring. The Hotr is this (earth), the Adhvaryu yonder (sky); in
Whose perfect guerdon, never failing, bringeth wealth to the men, to friends the thing they covet.
Their strengthener was Indra the Majestic he spread their stalls of kine the Wonder-Worker.
4 Fixing with thought, at sacrifice, the press-stones, I bid the well-formed Heaven and Earth come
recourse to Agni, full of sap, with his own share; verily he makes him possessed of sap [4]; he becomes
support. He puts down the naturally perforated (brick); the naturally perforated (brick) is the
3. O Indra, send us riches, thou omniscient, worthy of our hymns:
1. ON flows the stream of Soma who beholds mankind: by everlasting Law he calls the Gods from
Bring him the juice poured forth in sacrifice to-day. Now range you by the glorious one!
Full of strength, of milk, rich in offspring, free from sickness, from disease.
And may the unobstructed Night and Morning both, day and night, provide for our protection.
5 Ye Twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region's end,
Help, as thou gavest Rugama and Syavaka and Svarnara and Krpa aid.
1, THEE Agni, have the Gods, ever of one accord, sent hither down, a God, appointed messenger, yea,
3 Soma and Pusan, urge your chariot hither, the seven-wheeIed car that measures out the region,
1. THOU, Agni, shining in thy glory through the days, art brought to life from out the waters, from the
Or those of the Five Tribes of men, bring quickly all that help to us.
He was their satrifice that guards our bodies: him the heavens know, the earth, the waters know him.
sings; three are these worlds; verily from these worlds he redeems it; therefore one should not give to
1. Flow on, O thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy beloved form,
There are two Sattras of the gods, that of twelve days and that of thirty-three days. Those, who knowing
5 Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra's sake the mighty juice,
True was the boast of heroes sitting at the feast: so at their invocations Gods were on their side.
3 May the great Twain, the Mothers, Heaven and Earth, this day preserve us free from sin for peace
She, stirring up the world, hath shown us riches: Dawn hath awakened every living creature.
By Indra's and by Agni's hest, flowing away, the rivers, run which they released from their restraint.
In this last chapter, Shree Krishna repeats many of the principles he has already explained. In the beginning of this chapter, he explained to Arjun that merely running away from the responsibilities of life is not sanyās, nor is it renunciation. Now he describes the state of actionlessness, or naiṣhkarmya-siddhi. This state can be reached even amidst the flow of the world by detaching ourselves from events and outcomes, and simply focusing on doing our duty. This is just as water flowing under a bridge enters from one side and flows out from the other. The bridge is neither the recipient of the water nor its distributor; it remains unaffected by its flow. Likewise, the karm yogis do their duty, but keep the mind unaffected by the stream of events. They do not neglect putting in their best efforts in doing their duty, as an act of worship to God, but they leave the final outcome in his hands, and are thus contented and undisturbed with whatever happens. Here’s a simple story to illustrate this point. A man had two daughters; the first was married to a farmer and the second was married to a brick kiln owner. One day, the father rang up the first daughter and inquired how she was doing. She replied, “Father, we are going through economic hardships. Please pray to God for us that we may have plentiful rains in the coming months.” He then rang up the second daughter, and she requested, “Father, we are low on funds. Please request God not to send rains this year, so that we may have lots of sunshine and a good production of bricks.” The father heard the opposite requests of his daughters, and thought, “God alone knows what is best. Let him do what he feels is best.” Such acceptance of the will of God brings detachment from outcomes, despite being immersed in the incessant stream of events in the world.
strength. 'In that Indra, slew Vrtra, there is impurity, in that he destroyed the Yatis, there is impurity;
plants and trees the form, the fire the splendour; to his greatness, to Prajapati, thee (I offer). Hail!
3. With holy song they bind to the broad wide-yoked car the bay steeds of the quickening God,
Come with the High Ones hither, Maghavan, to us, Mighty, to drink the Soma juice.
Auspicious is your gift like a free giver's meed, victorious, spreading far, as of immortal Gods.
o Thou art the measure of a thousand, thou art the image of a thousand, thou art the size of a thousand,
The might of Asuras rests on thee, like Mitra worshipful in act.
man employ the sacrifice, planning to sacrifice. 'To wisdom, to thought, to Agni, hail!' he says, for by
32. Strew a new barhis for the porridge: pleasing to its heart, and lovely to its sight it shall be! Upon it the gods
cattle followed it, it became hump backed. He who desires cattle should offer this humpbacked (one) to
We edited the following Mantras in this Atharva Veda by incorporating ideas from Pandit Angirasa Muni
Pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for Soma, pure, be glad.
attains (what he seeks). The Ayana is successful, and therefore is it productive of cows.
k Homage to the Sadas, homage to the lord of the Sadas, homage to the eye of the friends who go
21 Yea, and on this our earth the All-Sustainer dwells like a King with noble friends about him.
14 May Aja-Ekapad and Ahibudhnya, and Earth and Ocean hear our invocation;
6 Thou helpest one to power, and one thou hast not helped, O Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy
a lord of food', should offer to Agni, lord of food, a cake on eight potsherds; verily he has recourse to
This is our highest bond: I am his offspring. How many others came ere I succeeded?
cave,Those sages, having marked the falsehoods, turned them back whence they had come, and sought
The stirring draughts of juice outpoured have made thee glad: thou, Thunderer, hast rejoiced with
12 Mount Indra, lover of the men thou guardest, the well-yoked horses of the wind, best bearers.
I live all my days', he should offer this sacrifice, to Agni on eight potsherds, to Soma an oblation, to
t There hath come into being this might of all the world,
2 Amid the sages, with the Sun he brightened the Parents: glorified, he burst the mountain;
1. FORTH through the straining-cloth the Sage flows to the banquet of the Gods,
Let Mitra, Aryaman,- seeking betimes our rite, seat them upon the sacred grass.
1. Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee: cleansed by the men speed forward to the battle.
With these chase all our foes to every quarter: subdue the tribes of Dasas to the Arya.
4. Come hither to the dropping juice, O Lord of cornland. Lord of horses, Lord of kine:
2. The Steer with thousand streams who poureth out the rain, dear to the race of deities;
4 In Ila's place we set thee down, upon the central point of earth,
21 Flow on with might as Pavamana, Indu flow loudly roaring through the fleecy filter.
5 Thou, Soma, art the Lord of heroes, King, yea, Vrtra-slayer thou:
2. This offering to-day, O Sipivishta, I, skilled in rules, extol, to thee the noble.
Drive Nirrti away into the distance, and give us excellent and happy glories.
5 Rejoicing in the Soma-draughts, Hero, burst open, like a fort,
k For the people, for a prop, a support I take thee.
2 Great is that secret name and far-extending, whereby thou madest all that is and shall be.
1. The plants that are brown, and those that are white; the red ones and the speckled ones; the sable and the
and the vessel which holds the purified Soma. If he were to begin (the Stotra) without drawing them off,
That Asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. The ships of truth have borne the pious man
d He puts down golden bricks; gold is light; verily be confers light upon him; again gold is brilliance;
Gandharvas have seized bold of him, and in the Soma laid the juice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
sorts of men, the equal and the unequal; verily whatever spell they dig against him he thus casts out. He
9 Neer may he harm us who is earth's Begetter, nor he whose laws are sure, the heavens' Creator,
31. Hand over the sickle, with haste bring promptly (the grass for the barhis); without giving pain let them cut the
immortal. With these we set our feet in this house and take possession of it.
3 And there the best of charioteers hath guided through the speckled cloud
Thou goest on an embassy to Surya, subdued by love, desirous of the glory.
For sons and progeny, for kine and waters: he bursts the cow-stall on the day of trial.
May he with wisdom, Sakra! Looser! Much-invoked! aid us to riches and to seed.
should breathe out along it; verily he unites expiration with expiration; having put down the second [2]
13 Whose name extendeth like a sea, alone, resplendent, so that all have joy in it,
5 The Soma, Indra, which the earth and heaven bear for thee as a mother bears her infant,
7 He goes to Indra, Vayu, to the Asvins, as his custom is,
22 These herbs, these milch-kine, and these running waters, all these, O Soma, thou hast generated.
whom these are put down goes to the world of heaven, attains brilliance, and becomes a resplendent
Great persons have greater responsibility because common people follow them. So Shree Krishna urges that wise people should not perform any actions or make any utterances that lead the ignorant toward downfall. It may be argued that if the wise feel compassion for the ignorant, they should give them the highest knowledge—the knowledge of God-realization. Lord Krishna neutralizes this argument by stating na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayet, meaning the ignorant should not be asked to abandon duties by giving superior instructions they are not qualified to understand.Usually, people in material consciousness consider only two options. Either they are willing to work hard for fruitive results or they wish to give up all exertions on the plea that all works are laborious, painful, and wrought with evil. Between these, working for results is far superior to the escapist approach. Hence, the spiritually wise in Vedic knowledge should inspire the ignorant to perform their duties with attentiveness and care. If the minds of the ignorant become disturbed and unsettled then they may lose faith in working altogether, and with actions stopped and knowledge not arising, the ignorant will lose out from both sides.If both the ignorant and the wise perform Vedic actions, then what is the difference between them? Apprehending such a question, Shree Krishna explains this in the next two verses.
Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effecteth much. Supreme is Indra over all.
He who desires the heaven should offer an oblation to Aryaman; Aryaman is yonder sun; verily he has
h For the whirl of the wind [1] thee, for the rush of Pusan, for the growth of the waters, of the plants.
10 Far be thy dart that killeth men or cattle: thy bliss be with us, O thou Lord of Heroes.
6 The immortal Courser, good to draw, looks down upon the Seven: the fount
Full many a wise man lifts to thee the song of praise, and hails thee with a kiss as Sovran of this world.
3. Hence riches came to thee, the King, O sapient one: the strong-winged bird,
Do ye taste, accept it, rejoice in it, O ye strong ones
8 With your bellies full of the Soma, like two saucepans, preservers of wealth, destroyers of enemies.
the pressure that comes from the midst of men, she shall spread out for us, and fit. herself for us!
Him whom our songs increase in strength, the Lord of bounty swift to come.
4. To him, Adhvaryu! yea, to him give offerings of the juiceexpressed!
These the two world-halves have I, even as Tvastar knowing all beings, joined and held together.
yonder world the wind blows over the piler of the fire; he offers the names of the winds; verily over him
12 The Mighty One was born Immortal, giving life, lightening darkness with his shine.
1. This attacking talisman, (itself) a man, is fastened upon the man: it is full of force, slays enemies, makes heroes
8 Eight are the Sons of Adid who from her body sprang to life.
i Araru is smitten away from the earth, the place of sacrifice.
Punish us not for any sin, O Fathers, which we through human frailty have committed.
3 Far from us, Agni, put thou all diseases let them strike lauds that have no saving Agni.
appeased he calms his pain. The beast that first steps over the fire when piled, it is liable to burn it up
7 Him, for his ample bounty, him, this Indra do I urge to drink,
With course unchecked, with many chariots Aryaman comes with the seven priests to tribes of varied
Carefully tended in his Parents' bosom, calling the weapons kin, goes forth to combat.
has two feet; verily he wins bipeds; the Yajya has four feet; verily he wins quadrupeds. The gods and the
2 All songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way,
formula (Yajus), so many cattle would be as he might consecrate himself for. 'O Soma, give so much [7]
May this rich Indra, as our good Protector, drive off and keep afar all those who hate us.
5 just at this time of the day and the night thy look is the sweetest .
(of Agni). Now confusion occurs in that they perform the same thing with a better and worse
i We bear Agni of the dust in the manner of Angiras.
3 Though borne by swift steeds he will yet unyoke them: e'en the fleet chariot hath he stayed from
fire by friction, (with the words), 'Hence first was Agni born, from his own womb, the all-knower; he
8 Peer of each noble thing, yea, all excelling, all creatures doth he know, he slayeth Susna.
death, and reach the conclave of the gods.' They saw this twenty-four night (rite); they grasped it, and
The cripple stood erect, the blind beheld them. These things did Indra in the Soma's rapture.
1. EVEN far and wide, O Varuna and Mitra, doth your grace extend.
h For expiration thee, for inspiration thee, for through-breathing thee (I pound).
To whom the racers, swift of foot, to whom our wellborn princes come. Bring food to those who sing thy
31 From far away ye come to us, Asvins, enjoying plenteous food
Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve to settle, priest-like, in his place.
4.7.36 Sukta 36 – Love Charm spoken by a Bridal Couple
With the offerings of the sacrifice, O lord of the sacrifice,
Seven are the Aditya Deities,-with these, O Soma, guard thou us. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.
By Law they came to truth, the Law's observers, bright by their birth, and pure, and sanctifying.
another, (saying) 'By thee shall we distinguish them, by thee.' They fixed upon Aditi, (saying, 'By thee
imploreth (a blessing) N. N.', he says; verily by indicating him he makes him attain the world of heaven.
d In the waters [1] is ambrosia, in the waters is medicine;
be undeceived; may I deceive N. N.', he says; by that deceit the gods deceived the Asuras; verily by this
Guard us, O Agni, with those boundless glories as with a hundred fortresses of iron.
Tristubh, and this is the sevenfooted Çakvari. Whatever the gods were fain to do by it, that they were
1. WHETHER ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of heaven,
[5]; thereby he milks the eleventh breast of her. In that the set of eleven (is set up), a thunderbolt is set
14 Vasistha's sons have raised their voices, like their sire. Rsi-like praying to the Gods for happiness.
Not to the fanged that bites, not to the toothless: give not us up, thou Conqueror, to the spoiler.
7. Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends! the hero who deserves the laud,
not shut together!--Born of Indra, born of Soma, thou, (my charm), art Atharvan's crusher of tigers.
9 In fear they raised the lofty self-resplendent hymn, praise giving and effectual, leading up to heaven,
Let other men around us live in folly here let us have', a rich and liberal patron!
2. As thine, O Indu, is the praise, and thine what springeth from, the juice,
So let us here, each day that passes, honour the helpful Car with hearts exceeding joyful.
3 Unequelled in fight the hero leads his army with the warrior chiefs.
6 Whoso pours out for you, when days are closing, the sharp libation for your joy, O Vajas,
27 O Soma, O thou Sage, these worlds stand ready to attest thy might:
8 Knowing the Law, the seven strong floods from heaven, full of good thought, discerned the doors of
Joying thereat, O Indra, with thy Bay Steeds come:. ascend thy golden-coloured car.
I know that all this behavior is sinful. God! Let this water wash away from me this sinful behavior.
2. This Indra, made for giving gifts, is stablished, mightiest, in strength,
4 Agni is King, for he extends to mortals and to Gods alike.
established it; therefore [2] did Pusan prosper; therefore cattle are said to be Pusan's. Tvastr established
Thou in thy might surpassest all that hath been made: the Gods have not attained to thee.
8 Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to the cleaning sieve.
Flies with the teeth, frogs with the grinders; the cater with the gnawer; strength with the digester; the
3 Hither, O Wind, blow healing balm, blow all disease away, thou Wind;
f Thou art barley (yava); bar (yavaya) from us foes, bar evil spirits.
2 The speaker filleth with a cry to Indra his ears who cometh nigh e'en from a distance.
ruling', (with these words) he puts down on the east; 'Thou art the prop ruling', (with these words) he
The earless is the triumph of the gods; in that he puts down the earless, he triumphs with the triumph of
a To energy hail! To effort hail! To distraction hail! To attempt hail! To endeavour hail! To striving hail!
8 I will declare thy deeds of old, O Indra, the mighty acts which thou hast first accomplished.
4 They, like young suitors, sons of wealthy houses, have with their golden natures decked their bodies.
(sacrifice), the deities and the sacrifice depart; he should offer to Agni on five potsherds as the final act;
has forty-eight syllables, cattle are connected with the Jagati; verily with the Jagati he secures cattle for
3 Hurling his bolt with might he cleft the mountain, while, putting forth his strength, he showed his
who knows thus. 'Thy unerring, watchful name, O Soma', he says [3]; this is Soma's Soma-drinking; he
6 At the third sacrifice, O thou whom many praise, give glory to the roasted corn and holy cake.
20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would they harm indomitable Indra.
2 Aryaman art thou as regardeth maidens mysterious, is thy name, O Self-sustainer.
there are ten posts, the Viraj has ten syllables, and the Viraj is food, he wins proper food by the Viraj
Hurt thou another and not us, O Thunderarmed, one who would hurt, O Thunder-armed!
Hath the well-bearing Mother borne, producing when her time is come.
seasonal (bricks); the seasonal (bricks) are the abode dear to the seasons; verily he wins the abode dear
Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him, and like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled.
He who desires cattle should sacrifice with the Çitra (offering); Çitra is this (earth); in that in this (earth)
1. To you pure juice, rich in meath, are offered by priest: through longing for the Pair of Heroes.
As the birds spread their sheltering wings, spread your protection over us.
The stay of the regions; may force rich in friends be ours;
Material existence is like a vast ocean, where one is tossed around by the waves of birth, disease, old age, and death. The material energy subjects everyone to the three-fold miseries: ādiātmik—miseries due to one’s own body and mind, ādibhautik—miseries due to other living entities, and ādidaivik—miseries due to climactic and environmental conditions. In this state of material bondage, there is no respite for the soul, and endless lifetimes have gone by being subjected to these conditions. Like a football being kicked around the field, the soul is elevated to the celestial abodes, dropped to the hellish planes of existence, and brought back to the earthly realm, etc. according to its karmas of righteous or sinful deeds.Divine knowledge provides the boat to cross over the material ocean. The ignorant perform karmas and get bound by them. Performing the same karmas as a yajña to God liberates the knowledgeable. Thus, knowledge becomes the means of cutting material bondage. The Kaṭhopaniṣhad states:vijñānasārathiryastu manaḥ pragrahavān naraḥso ’dhvanaḥ pāramāpnoti tadviṣhṇoḥ paramaṁ padam (1.3.9)“Illumine your intellect with divine knowledge; then with the illumined intellect, control the unruly mind, to cross over the material ocean and reach the divine realm.”
upon him. 'O ye All-gods, that he may win old age', he says; verily he makes him win old age. 'Agni is
5. He who thinks him (the Brahman) mild, and slays him, he who reviles the gods, lusts after wealth, without
1. As rain from out the cloud, for you, Indra and Agni, from my soul
5 1 call the Sage who sounds like wind, the Might that like Parjanya roars,
29 When, Indra, all the Marut folk humbly submitted them to thee,
For their broad-chested speckled deer are standing like a King's armies on the field of battle.
3 Already have ye Twain, possessors of great wealth, prospered Visnapu thus for gain of what is good.
own abode. In that it completes the metres, it completes for the second time the sacrifice; in that the
Indra, may the quarters and Indra, may the head and Indra, may Prajapati and Indra (be auspicious for
6. O Agni, possessed of might, superior, thou dost without fail prevail! Bend down to the ground our hateful
Help us, O Maghavan, let thy favour aid us thus drive away foes and enemies!
2. To thee for shelter are we come, as to the shade from fervent heat,
moon (the Soma) is pressed for the gods; during this half-month it is pressed forth for them, and a cow
6 Such as thou art, born after Law, O Agni when lauded give protection to our bodies,
Indu, even us who drank, whose toils are offerings, poured from the spoon, with praise, upon the altar.
Or pressed among the Races Five24 May these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon us, as they flow,
3. Come to us, O ye Asvins twain, bringing your precious treasures, come
3. The gifts of Indra from of old, his saving succours never fail,
1. PASSED through, the fleece in thousand streams the Soma, purified, flows on
19 He, born afresh, is new and new for ever ensign of days he goes before the Mornings
Kusurubinda Auddalaki desired, 'May I be rich in cattle.' He grasped this (rite) of seven nights, and
2. With him loud-roaring, ever watchful victcr, bold, hard to overthrow, rouser of battle,
metres departed from the gods (saying), 'We will not carry your oblation without sharing (in it)'; for
a May I be pleasing to speech; pleasing to the lord of speech, O divine speech. The sweetness of speech
brâhmanam (Brahmanical life), the highest brahma, and all the gods, together with immortality (amrita).
place radiance in themselves. There is a praise of Agni with the Trivrt; verily they bum away evil with
wood, hail! To him that sitteth on the strew, hail! To him that findeth the heaven, hail!
thee', he says; verily thereby he bestows body upon him. The priests speak (these words) around; as
13 Thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, whom men must stir to help, hast been
The press-stone as it sheds the meath rings loudly forth. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
Clothed in his glory, deathless, keen of insight, must be adorned by all, the Strong, the Famous.
e For a prop, a support, of the five quarters I take thee.
6 When ye have hastened on with spotted coursers, O Maruts, on your cars with strong-wrought fellies,
14 Embrace another, Yami; let another, even as the woodbine rings the tree, enfold thee.
No foe hath he, no counterpart, no refuge is there from him the Conqueror full of wisdom
Young Dame, wool-soft unto the guerdongiver, may she preserve tbee from Destruction's bosom.
4 May Savitar the God, O Stones, stir you as Law commands for him
As the priest decks yon, Strong Ones, in assemblies, and the prince fain to worship you for blessings.
As the free-handed giver of the ruddy steed, I have named Pakasthaman fourth.
10 Whole strength have ye, O Bounteous Ones; perfect, earth-shakers, is your might.
8 Hither from eastward all at once they travel, from one place spreading in the selfsame manner.
24. The trees, and (growths) that are like trees, the plants and the herbs as well, the Gandharvas and the
should offer to the All-gods (a beast) of many forms; food is connected with the All-gods; verily he has
10 Subandlin's spirit I have brought from Yarna, from Vivasvan's Son,
1. As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our songs we glorify
1. THOU, Agni, even as Mitra, hast a princely glory of thine own.
d Thou art Varuna who guardeth law; thou art of Varuna.
19. Dissolved, crushed, slain the enemy shall lie, O Nyarbudi! May victorious sprites, with fiery tongues and
The sages who aspire for God are not motivated to work for material gain. Why then do they engage in activities in this world? The reason is that they wish to serve God, and are inspired to do works for his pleasure. The knowledge of the previous verse assures them that they themselves will never be bound by welfare work that is done in the spirit of devotion. They are also moved by compassion on seeing the sufferings of the materially bound souls who are bereft of God consciousness, and are inspired to work for their spiritual elevation. The Buddha once said, “After attaining enlightenment, you have two options—either you do nothing, or you help others attain enlightenment.” Thus, even sages who have no selfish motive for work still engage in activities for the pleasure of God. Working in devotion also attracts the grace of God. Shree Krishna is advising Arjun to do the same.  Having asked Arjun to perform actions that do not bind one, the Lord now begins expounding the philosophy of action.
1 Now Morning with her earliest light shines forth, dear Daughter of the Sky:
Aryaman, heroes' Lord, art thou, enrich ing all, and liberal Amsa in the synod, O thou God.
They milked her: Aryaman, joined with them, did the work: he knoweth her as well as I.
Our gain was that to Trta of our party thou gavest up Tvastar's son Visvarupa.
4 Him for your sake I glorify as Lord of Strength who wrongeth none,
The Gods came pressing to thy side, and free from terror aided thee.
12 With Svaha. pay the sacrifice to Indra in the offerer's house:
he restrains his speech, for the support of the sacrifice. 'This Brahman has consecrated himself', he says
Favour our songs, wake up our thought and spirit: destroy the godless and our foemen's malice.
He who desires prosperity should offer to the Adityas, giving prosperity; it is the Adityas who repel
Thou art the great quarter, the lady paramount by name; of thee as such Brhaspati is overlord, the white,
Hail! Return with Soma as thy comrade, with wealth', he says, verily having purchased by means of
These (offerings) also should he make who desires a village; the minor deities are the metres, a village is
that he recites sitting, so the Hotr goes not away from the (earth), for this (earth) is seated as it were;
around they repelled thereby; in that (they offered) to Agni with the face, the Raksases behind were
4 Crunch up on. every side the dogs who bark at us: slay ye our foes, O Asvins this ye understand.
2 The various doings of all mortal people by thee are ordered, in thy wisdom, Indra.
1. From thy head unto thy feet do I implant (love's) longing into thee. Ye gods, send forth the yearning love: may
eat [4], half they wipe; in this regard the sacrifice of the Asuras was broken; the gods united it by the
sacrifice; verily by them do they proceed to the world of heaven [3]. They mount the world of heaven
the glory of the gods, and on men the glory of men; verily he has the divine glory among the gods, the
2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the God, was Manyu, Manyu was Hotar, Varuna, Jatavedas.
The energy that composes this material world is incredibly complex and fathomless. To make it comprehensible to our finite intellect, we have classified it into various categories and sub-categories. Modern science propagates matter to be a combination of elements, and the 118 elements discovered so far, are sectioned under the Periodic Table.However, the Vedic philosophy and the Bhagavad Gita present a profoundly different classification of the material world. Matter is considered as part of God’s energy and called prakṛiti. It is further divided into eight forms, as listed in this verse. It is amazing how insightful the knowledge in these ancient scriptures is in comparison to the developing trends in modern science.Albert Einstein was the first to propound the concept of Mass-Energy Equivalence in 1905. In his Annus Mirabilis papers, he stated that it is possible to convert mass into energy and numerically presented it by an equation E=mc2. His Theory of Relativity replaced an earlier concept of the universe made of solid matter. Both these theories were challenged in 1920 by Niels Bohr and other scientists with Quantum Theory, which proposes a dual particle-wave nature of matter. Ever since, the scientific community has been on the lookout for a single field or Unified Field Theory, which could expound on the relationship between matter and all forces of the universe.More than 5000 years ago, long before the development of modern science, Lord Krishna had disclosed the perfect Unified Field Theory. He said to Arjun, “All that exists in the universe has manifested from My material energy.” Just one material energy has extended itself into myriad shapes, forms, and entities of this world. The Taittirīya Upaniṣhad has elaborated on this:tasmadvā etasmādātmana ākāśhaḥ sambhūtaḥākāśhādvāyuḥ vāyoragniḥ agnerāpaḥ adbhyaḥ pṛithivīpṛithivyā oṣhadhayaḥ oṣhadhībhyo ’nnam annātpuruṣhaḥsa vā eṣha puruṣho ’nnarasamayaḥ (2.1.2)"From My material energy the ākāśhaḥ (ether) was created,from etherthe air; fromair, fire; from fire, water; from water, earth; from earth, plants; from plants, food andfrom food, man. This man is madeof food-essence."The material energy in its primordial form is called prakṛiti. God glances at it when He wishes to create the world. His glance agitates and creates mahān. (There is no equivalent word for it in English, as modern science is yet to discover such a subtle level of energy) Mahān further manifests into ahankār even this is unknown to modern science. Ahankār, in turn, forms the pañch-tanmātrās or the five perceptions of – taste, touch, smell, sight, and sound. And from these, the five gross elements— space, air, fire, water, and earth manifest.Lord Shree Krishna includes the mind, intellect, and ego along with the five gross elements as different manifestations of His material energy. In this verse, He states that all these eight elements are simply parts of Maya, His material energy. In the next verse, He describes another of His superior energy; the soul energy.
i-m Here is support, hail! Here is keeping apart, hail Here is joy, hail! Here is delight, hail!
f Homage to you of misshapen form, and to you of all forms homage!
He loosens the knot; verily he sets them free from the noose of Varuna; verily he makes them fit for the
1. SPONTANEOUS let our drops of Soma juice flow on, pressed, golden-hued, among the Gods of lofty
2 For thou at first producest for the holy Gods the noblest of all portions, immor-tality:
5 Wise Pusan, Wonder-Worker, we claim of thee now the aid wherewith
3. This juice have we made sweet for thee like barley, blending it with milk.
the gods saw this Yajus, 'Go hence'; in that he makes him fix with this [1], he piles the fire on a place
Ye heard the weakling's wife, as 'twere an order, and gave to her a son Hiranyahasta.
1. Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward, the father of the earth, father of heaven.
Food springs abundant for all living creatures, what time Parjanya quickens earth with moisture.
and Sarva, call fervently upon you in distress: deliver us from calamity!
4 Strong Gods, we bid them come to this libation that stands ready here:
23 Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana Indu, besting, as lover to his darling.
Thee, Strong-jawed! as the homestead's Lord, the Atris with their lauds exalt, the Atris beautify with
We will attend the Heavenly One, the thousand-footed, red of hue, matchless, who blesses where he
4 Sweet is his growth as of one's own possessions; his look when rushing fain to burn is lovely.
4.19.53Sukta 53 – Prayer to Kala (Time), personified as a Primordial Power
the feast', they placed Agni in this world, and (saying),'The great and powerful one, O Agni', they placed
4 To him, as one who knows, even things solid yield: unrough fire-sticks heated hot he gives his gifts to
4 The steep declivities, the valleys, and the heights, the channels full of water, and the waterlessMay those who swell with water, gracious Goddesses, never afflict us with the Sipada disease, may all
1. WE stablish thee as Manus used, as Manus used we kindle thee.
Who pardons not his boldness who provokes him, who slays the Dasyti, He, O men, is Indra.
Vouchsafe us high renown, O Jatavedas, and may I be immortal by my children.
Come to our families, bringing them bliss: may we, whose heroes are uninjured, bring thee sacred gifts,
bestowed life, power, and strength upon himself; he who sacrifices creates as it were offspring; then he
8 There as he lies like a bank-bursting river, the waters taking courage flow above him.
Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Let the swift bird fly forth and leave us vigour.
6 May Heaven and Earth make food swell plenteously for us, all-knowing Father, jother, wondrous in
Then passing through the sieve into the ample room, the God throws off the dregs according to his
Therefore in the mind they offer to Prajapati, for Prajapati is, as it were, the mind; (verily it serves) to
first for his drink, then three, then two, then one. That is the drink called 'of a beatific back', full of
hill is to be borne on the head. With a verse, 'That god, Savitr', in the Atichandas metre he measures. The
15 O thou Most Lofty One, accept our laud as nearest to thine heart.
We, we the living, now behold her brightness and they come nigh who shall hereafter see her.
5 Through thy protection may we come to even the height of affluence
he consecrates him with all the metres. The first quarter verse is of seven syllables; the Çakvari is of
The child of the streams, the tawny one, rooted in the mountain,
With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, loud bellowing, bedews all things that are within.
2 They come trooping together bearing milk to him, and bring him sustenance who gives support to all.
19. As all these creatures, O Prâna, offer thee tribute, so they shall offer tribute (in yonder world) to him who
6 The strength-bestowing offering thus to Indra-Agni hath been paid, as butter, purified by stones.
When the Frog moistened by the rain springs forward, and Green and Spotty both combine their voices.
bays are cattle; if he were to crush (them), few [3] cattle would attend and wait on him; if he were not to
c Thou art the bodily form of penance, Prajapati's kind, I buy (Soma) with the last offspring of thee that
These of Brhaspati, like hunters' arrows, go to the skies that change their hue like serpents.
Dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice flow unto him like milch-kine, lowing, with their milk.
Of this may he, the ancient House-Lord, give us. Enjoy, drink of the milk the cow provideth.
11 The singer fills the spirit: all mens, love hath he. Indra takes kindly care of those who pour the juice.
2 Drink thou of this whereof at birth, O Indra, thou drankest, Mighty One for power and rapture.
his force, might, consecration [2], and penance. 'Do ye flowing waters place might (in me), place force,
aware,' When I have done this cruel deed, cattle will depart from me'; therefore he chose thus. The gods
3. Vishnu in the lofty ruling power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise:
through the Saman; full of light with the Viraj; drinker of Soma through the holy power; with cows he
Those who hound us in our chambers, while shouting goes on in the night of the new moon, and the other fleshdevourers who plan to injure us, all of them do I overcome with might.
13 Those who, the Princes of the folk, in native glory, neer deceived,
3 This Indu lighted darksome nights, O Indra, throughout the years, at morning and at evening.
Even the liberal wards not off those fierce ones, those who are light and agile in their greatness.
unite the sacrifice with its birthplace. The gods lost by conquest the sacrifice; they won it again from the
Wise, ancient, God, the Priest and Purifier, let Agni serve the Gods for he is worthy.
Lovely to look on, with red steeds, effulgent, like a feast rich in food, joyous for ever.
Wherewith, O Wondrous God, fair-visored, thunder-armed, thou hast filled full this earth and heaven.
1. THESE rapid Soma-drops have been poured through the purifying sieve
world, by the oblation in this; he who desires, 'May I prosper in yonder world', should offer a cake;
eight syllables, Agni is connected with the Gayatri; to Agni in his full extent he shows hospitality; verily
4 May the drops gladden thee, rich Indra, and obtain bounty for him who pours the juice.
17 E'en with the weak he wrought this matchless exploit: e'en with a goat he did to death a lion.
Strengthened by holy prayer Agni and Soma have made us ample room for sacrificing.
he wins cattle. (Saying) 'Ours be wealth', he pours it; verily the Adhvaryu [4] does not deprive himself
15 This is that Agni, saviour from the foeman, who guards the kindler of the flame from sorrow:
1. HE who, just born, chief God of lofty spirit by power and might became the Gods' protector,
He was Vivasvan's envoy, at your glad carouse-the weIl-loved friend of Yama, Thou art waxing great.
12. Slain are they who are inmates with him, slain are his neighbours; moreover all the quite tiny worms are slain.
1 I WILL declare the manly deeds of Indra, the first that he achieved, the Thunder-wielder.
The race of kine is thy gift, Pavarridna: when born thou madest Surya rich with brightness.
might, power, strength, offspring, and cattle of the Asuras. Because the Gayatri remained away,
Cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling: Indu hath flowed with milk and with the waters.
5. Reverence be to those with sunken eyes reverence to the indicenous (evils?), reverence to the lord of the field!
6 Now for us both, mete out, O WonderWorkers, riches exceeding great with store of heroes,
a Thou art a Vasvi, thou art a Rudra, thou art Aditi, thou art an Aditya, thou art Çukra, thou art Candra.
Seated upon this sacred grass be joyful, and give us strengthening food that brings no sickness.
9. We, Indra, Lord of ample wealth, our guide, depend on one like thee,
1. All sacred songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea.
Will not the Indestructible endow us with perfect knowledge of this wealth, of cattle?
And to sage Bharadvija gave protecting help,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
[3], he would obstruct his breaths by cattle, he would be likely to perish. Having eaten those for two
to Indra, 'Thou art the strongest of us; let us hold on to thee.' He said, 'Three are these forms of my own
His who begat the strong bolt's Lord who roareth, immovable like earth from her foundation.
By his own nature gained the highest treasure, and looked abroad over the earth and heaven.
anything else (can be accepted) at will.' The son born of intercourse with (a woman) with stained
9. The singing-men of ancient time open the doors of sacred songs-The men who bring the mighty One.
Skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, impetuous as a bull that snorteth in the mead.
11 Let us serve Agni with our hymns, Disposer, fed on ox and cow,
20 For he alone is Lord of all the treasures of the earth: he speeds
15 For bliss I call. the blissful car, at morn the inseparable Asvins with their car
5 Yea, when a mortal knowingly, O Victor, injures with double tongue a fellow-mortal,
[1]. He should divide the rice grains into three parts; the mean size he should make into a cake on eight
7 Never do they deny or seek to hide the favour of the Gods:
7 Indra, the bard sang forth in inspiration: thou madest earth a covering for the Dasa.
He shall bring both these great worlds while the rite proceeds: the Sage holds these who move!
10 Him, Sage and Herald, void of guile, ensign of sacrifices, him
'Be it proclaimed', 'Utter', 'We that utter', the Vasat call--prospers himself, his foe is defeated. The
2 Men, Vasu! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to the foremost place:
3 Onward he flows, from both the hands, pressed out with stones: excited by the prayer, the water
1. MEN call on Indra in the armed encounter that he may make the hymns they sing decisive.
7. Agni of Divodasa, God, comes forth like Indra in his might.
4 And these Two Priests come nigh unto our people, united, demon-slayers, mighty-handed.
1. Giver from all sides, bring to us from every side, thou whom as strongest we entreat!
c In the wealth of earth I place thee; in the wealth of the atmosphere I place thee; in the wealth of the sky
1. We make this Indra very strong to strike the mighty Vritra dead:
girdle part alike for one who desires the world of men, with the top pieces alike for one who desires
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we find strengthening food in full abundance!
Who kindles thee devoutly in his dwelling,to him be wealth secure and freely giving.
4 Most Youthful and Eternal, bring the longing Gods to me, the guileless, for the feast.
4. The princes evermore behold that loftiest place of Vishnu, like
1.9.20 Mantra 20 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Asita Kasyapa, Devala Kasyapa)
'He indeed would take the steps of Visnu who after acquiring these worlds of his foe should descend
the Tristubh metre, in the manner of Angiras; may the Adityas fill thee with the Jagati metre, in the
1. I WILL extol the most heroic Indra who with his might forced earth and sky asunder;
2 To him the Bounteous say the laud, and let us glorify, as men May do, the Giver of true gifts.
2. Hence conquering with might when car meets car, and when the prize is staked,
fix (on the place); verily having asked from Yama a place of it for divine sacrifice, he piles the fire for
As thou with, Krsa and Samvarta hast rejoiced, so, Indra, be thou glad with us.
oblation-holder over the skin, sacrifice in the Ahavaniya, retire towards the west, and consume (the
our children, to rob them of their strengthmay she eat (her own) offspring!
ruddy (cows); Surya in unison with the steed; the Açvins in unison
1. Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize thou their bodies, and depart, O Agha!
4.7.37 Sukta 37 – Cure against one that practices hostile Charms
12 Though here and there, in varied hymns, Indra, men call on thee for aid,
5 The Bull whose strength hath waxed, whom Maruts follow, free-giving Indra, the celestial Ruler,
10 Indra, through hope in thee alone even this sickle do I grasp.
Let our old age with passing days be kindly. Let Nirrti depart to distant places.
1.8.28 Mantra 28 – Visvedevas (Author: Manu Vaivasvata or Kasyapa Marica)
is he to go to offer the sacrifices in the southern fire? Because that is the end of the fires. But how are the
3 Ascend thy mighty car: the mighty Soma is poured for thee and sweets are sprinkled round us.
16 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the earth is he:
The pure and lovely face of holy Order hath shone like gold of heaven in its arising.
Giver of glorious wealth to him who sings his praise, honouring him who toils and pours.
undertake a long Sattra. He who knowing the seer, the hearer, the reciter, sacrifices, is united in yonder
7 Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled fire, offered the first oblation with his heart and soul,
neither among the domesticated nor the wild beasts has it a place; verily he afflicts it with pain. With
20 What time our wives draw near to us, may he, left-handed Tvastar, give us hero sons.
One stream after another have they gained from thee, eager for glory have they gained.
Let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven.
5 May I travel the Lord’s favorite path, which is the delight of God-seeking men;
away the Asuras who were behind; other sacrifices are made in the east, the Çukra and Manthin on the
electors'), He did call thee to thy own domain (thinking): 'let him revere the gods, and manage, too, the people'!
Like floods of rain that fall- in thunder from the cloud, so Sindhu rushes on bellowing like a bull.
When Indra and the Dragon strove in battle, Maghavan gained the victory for ever.
black garment with a black fringe; that is the hue of rain; verily becoming of like hue he causes Parjanya
4 Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also are these hills.
m Thou containest all life, strengthen the earth; thou restest firm, strengthen the atmosphere; thou restest
4 With strength of limb the hero slays the hero, when bright in arms they range them for the combat.
By men's discernment are Ve marked, O ye whose might is purified.
As Vasu, thou alone art Lord of all good things, of all the treasures that the heavens and earth produce.
1. May Indra churn (the enemy), he, the churner, Sakra (mighty), the hero, that pierces the forts, so that we shall
Knowing. the realm of light, hath come to us in rain: he summons to himself his own primeval Sire.
from the waters, the food of man is plants [2], and offspring are born through Prajapati?' 'Through the
2 To thee I offer reverent speech: accept it: to thee who markest it, victorious, faithful!
he desire of a man, 'May he be a ruler', he should think of him with his mind; verily he becomes a ruler
Let not your car come slowly to our worship: of kinsmen such as you ne'er let us weary.
3 Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard's ways: his branches evermore are sent forth to consume.
of cattle. Fifteen indeed are the nights of the half-month, the year is made up of half-months, cattle are
10 The might which Usana hath formed for thee with might rends in its greatness and with strength both
1. URGED on by deep devotion, O ye singers, bring, pious ones, the God-approaching ladle.
gods', (with these words) he offers in the pan; verily he yokes it again and thereby is it not exhausted.
brilliance of Agni; in that (he offers) to Indra of the Brhat, verily he wins the brilliance of Indra; in that
9 He, unopposed, is master of the riches.of his own subjects and of hostile people.
life, lustre, strength, longevity, unto a life lasting a hundred autumns, May the (amulet) of pearl protect thee!
the strong Agni', he says, for he is strong, and Agni is strong. 'Germ of the waters [7], him of the ocean',
23 If I were thou and thou wert I, O Agni, every prayer of thine
1. The heavens have stood still, the earth has stood still, all creatures have stood still. The trees that sleep erect
He, the swift Guide, is that fair form that loosed the horses near at hand.
8 Such, wealthy Gods! as none afar nor standing nigh to us may harm,
Which, ceaseless, thrice a day shall yield us hero power enriched with store of nourishment, and
Strewn sacred grass, anointed him with butter, and seated him as Priest, the Gods' Invoker.
2 Having gone up on high, the God broadhanded spreads his arms widely forth that all may mark him.
c The treasure-house of sky which the heroes rich in dew
brick; the naturally perforated brick is yonder (sky); verily he puts down yonder (sky). He makes the
these worlds. The middle one is made of barley, that is the form of the atmosphere; (verily it serves) for
What time ye hear our call and come, O Maruts, upon your separate path all creatures tremble.
Eager and prompt at will, wherewith thou crushedst the boasting Dragon, O impetuous Hero.
All the Gods raised as 'twere a shout of triumph to Indra praise because he slew the Dragon.
left first. He does not rub (the ointment) on, for men rub (the ointment) on. Five times he anoints; the
Singing with love, may we the Visvamitras win daylight even now through thee, O Indra.
30 Keep us, O Jatavedas, from the troubling of the man of sin:
6. Let the song, honouring the best, with longing honour the Asura's most famous sovran,
3 When the Bull, quaffing, praises our Iibation, as a sage paying holy rites in secret,
i So, O Soma, god to the gods, hast thou gone, and I here man to man, with offspring, with increase of
11 This Soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the braided locks:
1. FROM you two came the gifts in days aforetime which Trasadasyu granted to the Purus.
k Do thou sit down in the lap of this mother [4],
oblation for us.' He said, 'Let me choose a born; let them offer to me the Vajaprasaviya'; therefore to
them down, and with them he appropriated the power and strength of Vasistha; in that he puts down the
The gods and the Asuras strove for these worlds; Visnu saw this dwarf, he offered it to its own deity;
4 Nabhaka-like, with sacred song Indra's and Agni's praise I sing,
3. Desirous do I, O Agni, with firewood and ghee offer oblations (to thee), for success and strength; according to
he makes the rain to move. He unites (them) on a black antelope skin; verily he makes the offering; he
1. For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of weal,
1 WITH words sent forth in holy hymns, Agni we supplicate, the Lord
3 He flows about the sheep-skin, longing for a bride: he looses Aditi's Daughters for the worshipper.
Who stirs the sunlight, and the sea, for that we long.
3. Indra hath ever thought of you and tended you with care. The God,
3 All Gods devoid of guile, who know the mighty region of mid-air:
body is the eleventh; he offers as many after-sacrifices as is the size of the beast. Now they kill the beast
puts down the two Retahsic (bricks), they support the seed of the sacrificer; therefore he should have
From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.
4. This earth is (his first) piece of firewood, the heaven the second, and the atmosphere also he fills with (the
7 Agni hath entered longingly the longing shrine rich with fatness, giving easy access.
3 Bring, by thy flowing, weal to kine, weal to the people, weal to steeds.
While all fruits and flowers grow from the same land, only the best amongst them are selected for an exhibition. Similarly, everything that is manifest and unmanifest in the universe is the glory of God, but the prominent amongst them are singled out for mention as his opulence.Amongst the sages in the celestial planes of existence, Bhrigu is special. He possesses wisdom, glory, and devotion. Lord Vishnu holds the mark of his foot on his chest as a consequence of a divine pastime described in the Puranas in which Bhrigu tested the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv. Shree Krishna’s glory is revealed best through him.Worshippers of God in his formless aspect like to meditate on the “Om” vibration, which is another vibhūti of God. Shree Krishna had declared previously, in verses 7.8 and 8.13, the syllable “Om” to be a sacred sound. It is the anāhat nād (the sound vibration that pervades creation). It is often present in the beginning of Vedic mantras for invoking auspiciousness. It is said that from the mono-syllable “Om” the Gayatri mantra was revealed, and from the Gayatri mantra, the Vedas were revealed.The Himalayas are a mountain range lying at the north of India. Since ages, they have inspired spiritual awe and wonder in billions of devotees. Their atmosphere, environment, and solitude are conducive to the performance of austerities for spiritual progress. Thus, many great sages reside in the Himalayas in their subtle bodies, practicing penance for their own advancement and for the benefit of humankind. And so, of the multitude of mountain ranges in this world, the Himalayas best display his opulence.Yajña is the act of dedicating ourselves to the Supreme. The simplest of all yajñas is the chanting of the holy names of God. This is called japa yajña, or the sacrifice of the devotional repetition of the divine names of God. For the practice of ritualistic yajñas, a number of rules are applicable, all of which need to be meticulously followed. However, in japa yajña, there are no rules. It can be done anywhere and at any time, and is more purifying than the other forms of yajñas. In the present age of Kali, the chanting of the names of God is even more emphasized.kalijuga kevala nāma ādhārā, sumiri sumiri nara utarahiṅ pārā (Ramayan)[v28]“In the age of Kali, the chanting and remembrance of the names of God is the most powerful means of crossing the ocean of material existence.”
1. WAKE with one mind, my friends, and kindle Agni, ye who are many and who dwell together.
10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva, Trasadasyu, and to Paktha and Dasavraja;
The King shall be effectual strength's upholder: he by the ten bright reins is mostly guided.
15 Now to this grass are come the longing Waters: the Pious Ones are seated at our worship.
guardian, to food as bowman: do ye guard it for us, until we arrive. To the goal here, &c.
Chakra, or cycle, means an ordered series of events. The cycle from grains to rains has been described in verse 3.14. All members of this universal wheel of action perform their duties and contribute to its smooth rotation. Since we also partake of the fruits of this natural cycle, we too must do our bounden duty in the chain.We humans are the only ones in this chain who have been bestowed with the ability to choose our actions by our own free will. We can thus either contribute to the harmony of the cycle or bring about discord in the smooth running of this cosmic mechanism. When the majority of the people of human society accept their responsibility to live as integral parts of the universal system, material prosperity abounds and spiritual growth is engendered. Such periods become golden eras in the social and cultural history of humankind. Conversely, when a major section of humankind begins to violate the universal system and rejects its responsibility as an integral part of the cosmic system, then material nature begins to punish, and peace and prosperity become scarce.The wheel of nature has been set up by God for disciplining, training, and elevating all living beings of varying levels of consciousness. Shree Krishna explains to Arjun that those who do not perform the yajña enjoined of them become slaves of their senses and lead a sinful existence. Thus, they live in vain. But persons conforming to the divine law become pure at heart and free from material contamination.
worlds. He makes (it) with the metres; the metres are strength; verily he makes it with strength. He
She, the coy Dame, was filled with dew prolific: with adoration men approached to praise her.
10 May this your laud, may this your song O Maruts, sung by the poet Mana's son,
Maghavan in his bended arm supports him: he slays, unasked, the men who hate devotion.
8 The earth's eight points his brightness hath illumined, three desert regions and the Seven Rivers.
[4]; verily afterwards he wins for him metres unwearied; the next sacrifice resorts to him. These
again (pratîkîh) the spells, and slay yonder fashioners of the spells!
6 Thou savedst Kutsa when Susna was smitten down; to Atithigva gavest Sambara for a prey.
9. 'Superior,' O kushtha, is thy name; 'superior' is the name of thy father. Do thou drive out all disease, and render
Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to ample opulence.
With reverence Gods and mortals have established thee as everwatchful and almighty household Lord.
11 He who discovered in the fortieth autumn Sambara as he dwelt among the mountains;
7 Easy to turn and drive away, Indra, is spoil bestowed by thee.
moon night, they leave out a day, for they behold the month by the full moon night. He who pours
17 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew earthward, thus they spake:
35 Thou, Pavamana, sendest food and power in streams. thou sittest in the beakers as a hawk on
18. O Vâkaspati, the five seasons that we have, which have come about as the creation of Visvakarman, rialit
down the (earth). He makes the horse sniff it; verily he bestows breath upon it; now the horse is
1. I LAUD the Heroes Twain, this heaven's Controllers: singing with songs of praise I call the Asvins,
4 For thou thyself, O Indu, God, to every mortal worshipper
Lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss. With brave men in the assembly may we speak
Drawn by strong Soma juice poured forth around us, come, Indra-Agni, and display your favour.
him. He who has a dispute over a field or with his relatives should offer a cake on eight potsherds to
Hear all the Gods my words, Sarasvati give ear together with Purandhi and with Holy Thoughts.
For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vrtra's vital part?
7 Soma, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the hymn to thee for mighty strength and
16 May this my laud reach earth and air's mid-region, and forest trees and plants to win me riches.
4 Strong Lord, thine energies, endowed with vigour, are like the paths of kine converging homeward.
them do they find support. In that they perform the Prsthas in the Viçvajit in the obvious manner, it is as
Mighty art thou, the ever-present Household-Lord, Home-friend and Guardian from the sky.
To the offspring of waters a fish; the crocodile, the dolphin, the Kulikaya are for the ocean; to speech the
5 Lodged in old plants, he grows again in younger, swiftly within the newly-born and tender.
5. We would see thy might, O Gâtavedas; disclose to us the wizards, O thou that beholdest men! May they all,
earth', he says; verily with them he encircles him on both sides. He puts it down to the east,' to attain the
both. In that the Prsthas are performed in succession [1], they conquer by them yonder world. In that the
8 Thine, Lord of Bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the spoil. Still with thy help I seek the fight.
verse for harmony; to Agni with the Vasus he offered a cake on eight potsherds, to Soma with the
5 Upon the lofty ridge of heaven thy bright rays with their essences,
21 Red-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its lovely breast,
So may the Render rend our foes on every side, rend them, O Hero, everywhere.
1. YEA, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service of the Gods,
offers these libations; verily he delights the half-months, the months, the seasons, the year; he does not
and Varuna, that is in the fire, that of yours I appease hereby', he says; verily he protects him from error
9 O Agni, in our deeds of might may we obtain all precious things:
Let me not utter words that ye may disregard. Closely allied with you may we rejoice in bliss.
52 The Bird Celestial, vast with noble pinion, the lovely germ of plants, the germ of waters,
Kindled, Most Youthful One! by Bharadvaja's hand, shine on us, O pure God, with wealth, shine,
Indra vouchsafed the lord of cows his favour: with mighty steps the buffalo ran onward.
22 Into his stream who gladdens best these Soma juices have been poured,
9 With food for mine enjoyment Sapya Nami came: he joined me as a friend of old in search of kine.
10 Effused by stones, O Soma, and urged through the long wool of the sheep,
When thou attackest Vritra, all the hostile bands shrink and faint, Indra, at thy wrath.
The Falcon brought it to him for his own delight: now with the twofold kindred sisters is his home.
8. Relaxed is the opening of thy bladder like the ocean, the reservoir of water--thus let thy urine be released, out
the strings of their bows, by the fastenings of their coats-of-mail, by the battle-throng, they shall lie!
gift of thine, O Agni [2], cometh, impelled by the Soma', he says, for his gift comes impelled by the
5 These offerings have ye made with adoration: say this, Sarasvati, and accept our praises;
5 He who is Lord of all the world that moves and breathes, who for the Brahman first before all found
7 Both Gods who look on men I call, Celestial Heralds: Indra's Self
5 Forth darts the Bull's tongue like the sharp stone weapon discharged by him who fights to win the
him; he, yoked, carries him to the world of heaven. If he were to yoke with all five together, his fire
'destructive' he should draw for him who has a rival; verily having destroyed his rival he reaches the top
1. HITHERWARD have I called to-day, for succour, that most wondrous car
The whole thereof remove from us to Trita Aptya far away.
1. OF this benignant Priest, with eld grey-coloured, the brother midmost of the three is lightning.
Make our ohlations duly offired up, O Priest, and give us store of precious things.
1. Indra, the merchant, do I summon: may he come to us, may he be our van; driving away the demon of grudge,
6 They laud the mighty acts of him the Mighty, the many glorious deeds performed by Indra.
(verses) containing the words Agni and pu; verily he renews it and makes it unageing, and also purifies
anoints, verily he takes away the eye of his enemy. He anoints his right eye first [5], for men anoint the
q Thou art named juhu, upabhrt, dhruva, loving the ghee, sit on thy dear seat with thy dear name.
1. A thousand and a hundred steeds are harnessed to thy golden car:
Oil-balmed, to be implored at sacrifices. Ye wealthy Waters, hear mine invocation.
Bring vigour, like a car that gathers booty: bring us, O Agni, beauteous.Rarth and Heaven.
Best favourer of the singer's prayer and praises. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
4 He who is Lord and Master of the steeds and kine, honoured -the firm and sure- at every holy act;
4 The aids wherewith the Wanderer through his offipring's might, or the Two-Mothered Son shows
5 Bring us that wondrous bounty, Dawn, that shall be famed most far away.
1. HIGH hymns have sounded forth the praise of Maghavan, supporter of mankind, of Indra meet for
9 Even Immortal Gods, O Jatavedas, Vadhryasva's Kinsman, have declared thy grandeur.
from the Gandharvas [5] that was the origin of the deer. The gods said, 'She has run from you; she
the noose is connected with Nirrti; verily he frees him straightway from the noose of Nirrti. He places
1. Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of valiant sons and does great deeds,
Wherewith ye helped Suryata in the mighty fray,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
Lord of Bay Steeds, strong-jawed, sublime, he in joined hands for glory's sake hath grasped his iron
4 They harness to the broad-wheeled car the mighty Courser whose back bears meath, unwearied,
8 With wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the stall of heaven,
May your most recent favour turn to us again. Come quickly, ye who fain would drink.
15. Thy in-breathing shall not cease, thy outbreathing shall not vanish; Sûrya (the sun), the supreme lord, shall
1. Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, Soma, the best of sacred gifts,
One of the beautiful features of the Vedas is that they recognize and cater to the wide variety of human natures. Different kinds of sacrifice have thus been described for different kinds of performers. The common thread running through them is that they are to be done with devotion, as an offering to God. With this understanding, one is not bewildered by the multifarious instructions in the Vedas, and by pursuing the particular yajña suitable to one’s nature, one can be released from material bondage.
5 When purified, he sits as King above the hosts, among his folk,
They, sportive, loudly roaring, armed with glittering spears, shakers of all, themselves admire their
6. Remain ye here, O in-breathing and out-breathing, do not go away from here; do ye car anew to old age his
5 Listen to Prthi's call, heroic Indra, and be thou lauded by the hymns of Venya,
verily he makes him go alive to the world of heaven. Now they break the sacrifice asunder when they
earth, that (sit) in the atmosphere, that sit in the sky', he says; verily traversing the worlds, he goes to
2 Or if for Manu.ye prepared the sacrifice, remember also Kanva's son.
hence other than I will be born will be this world'. Stroking her womb he split it, she became barren after
Ye Two Chief Priests who serve at this our worship, may ye, more skilled, win for us rich possessions.
k Do thou sit down in the lap of this mother,
2. On thee for aid in sacrifice, This youth of ours, the bold, the terrible, bath gone forth.
5 Like a Director, Savitar hath extended his golden arms, exceeding fair to look on.
tawny-coloured, for skill, for strength, for increase of wealth, for good heroes.
The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, Indra, Victor o'er all hosts and space, begirt with
The sweet exhilarating juice hath reached you. Hear ye my prayers, give ear unto my calling.
8 This envoy joyeth in all seats of worship, borne on his golden car, sweet-tongued Invoker:
2 Like-coloured, various-hued, or single-coloured, whose names through sacrifice are known to Agni,
In the last verse of this chapter, Shree Krishna declares that: those yogis who follow the path of light reap the fruits of their endeavours beyond any other processes can bestow. He says that even though one may undertake Vedic sacrifices, perform austerities, charity, or accumulate knowledge of the self, but without devotion to God, it is not the path of light. The Ramayan states:nema dharma āchāra tapa gyāna jagya japa dāna,bheṣhaja puni koṭinha nahiṅ roga jāhiṅ harijāna.“You may engage in good conduct, righteousness, austerities, sacrifices,ashtanga yoga, chanting of mantras, and charity. But without devotion to God, the mind’s disease of material consciousness will not cease.”All these good deeds can only reap material rewards, which are temporary. However, devotion to God leads to liberation from the bondage of the material world. Therefore, the yogis who have realized this truth detach their mind from the material world and attach it to God alone. Treading on this path of light, they eventually attain eternal happiness.
1. This, verily, is a remedy, this is the remedy of Rudra, with which one may charm away the arrow that has one
7 Wondrous! of wondrous power! give to the singer wealth wondrous, marked, most wonderful, lifegiving.
v By sacrifice to the god Indra, may I be powerful.
1 INDRA and Agni I invoke fain are we for their song of praise
the twenty-twofold; maintenance, the twenty-threefold; the womb, the twenty-fourfold; the embryo, the
The gods, having fixed up a place of sacrifice, could not distinguish the quarters. They ran up to one
Let Agni rapid with his rapid, horses, impetuous with impetuous Steeds, come hither.
So may the liberal lords whose strength is strongest, urged by their riches, stir our thoughts with vigour.
11 This little bird, so very small, hath swallowed all thy poison up.
16. These creatures all together shall yield milk for us; do thou, O earth, give us the honey of speech!
three draught cows are for the All-gods; the black-spotted hornless ones are for Agni and Indra.
d O thou that hast barley, that hast grain, (bring) renown for me;
They who strew sacred grass to be thy dwelling, helped by thee have got them strength, O Indra.
5 As the days follow days in close succession, as with the seasons duly come the seasons,
17 Which of us twain knows where they speak together, upper and lower of the two rite-leaders?
27 She, lady of all treasure, is come hither yearning in spirit for her calf and lowing.
3.12.1, 3.12.9, 3.15.4, 3.15.7, 3.30.1, 3.30.2, 3.30.3, 3.30.4, 3.30.5, 3.30.6, 3.30.7
23 Flow on to win us strength, flow on to lofty lore of every kind.
These, dropping oil, are yours, O Indra-Varuna: with these enrich with gifts and help the worshipper.
[1] creates offspring. If one who is consecrated sees anything impure, the consecration departs from
4 May this first Dawn bring us the host of gracious Gods: rich, may it richly shine for us who strive for
1. THE, glittering maids send Sura forth, the glorious sisters, close-allied,
2. For thou art offering-bearer, well-loved messenger, and charioteer of holy rites.
He, clothed in light, hath shone most fair to look on, wealthy in boons, as a home shines with riches.
1. I LAUD the seven-rayed, the triple-headed, Agni all-perfect in his Parents' bosom,
with light in them, or he should take them from the tank of a Brahman who performs many sacrifices,
11 Ye who are youthful, wise, and meet for worship, come, Martits, to the longing of the singer.
3. Most beauteous of the beauteous, Indra's thunderbolt, this Soma, rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat.
three Trayastrinças before, and three Trayastrinças behind; verily with Trayastrinças on either hand they
Indra observes this wish of his, and the Rain hastens with his troop.
Thou stormest trembling in thy rage, and findest not a foeman nigh.
And measure out to us, thou lover of man-kind, all riches hitherward from men
9 God! Be unto us easy of access, as is a father to his son.
11 Through days of earliest date the Drop descended on this place and on that which was before it.
Earth is the deity, Viraj the metre, thou art the vessel of the reserved (offering).
divine abode' [5], he says. The highest sacrifice is offspring, the greater offering is cattle, the divine
Who hath detained them with him? Whither are they gone? Unto what sage's or what worshipper's
6. As thou climbest up the trees, O asvattha, and renderest them subordinate, thus do thou split in two the head of
Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them. assuming all their fair and radiant beauty.
6 Agni, accept this sacrifice with gladness, which, seated here, the worshipper presenteth.
4. For him shall ye, O heaven and earth, milk ample good, as two milch-cows yielding warm milk! May this king be
8 Bearing in mind a thought with light accordant, he purified the Sun with three refinings;
5 Then men extolled the team of seven not yet full-grown, its fame is great.
To thy desires, Pururavas, I yielded: so wast thou king, O hero, of my body.
5. Hither hasten forth from the farthest distance heaven and earth, both, shall be propitious to thee! Thus did this
6 To him the truly strong, whose deeds are many, to him the strong Bull let us pour the Soma.
There is good grass and good water where the strew and the waters are [2]; the Vedi is the abode of the
2.1.8.5 Mantra 5: The Offering to the Pitrs at the Sakamedhas
Sustaining bolt of thunder, mighty like the God, like Surya, was deposited!
therefore verses are uttered at the full moon referring to the slaying of Vrtra, at the new moon referring
1. The heavens have stood, the earth has stood, all creatures have stood. The mountains have stood upon their
stronghold.' He said, 'Thou art called he who smites in the stronghold. Now a boar, stealer of the good,
14 These brilliant drops have poured for us, in stream of solemn sacrifice,
2 When, Maruts, on the steeps ye pile the moving cloud, ye are like birds on whatsoever path it be.
19. All-embracing, about to be covered with ghee, enter, (O pot), as a co-dweller this space!--Take hold of the
5 In the floods' home art thou enkindled, Agni, O Jatavedas, Son of Strength, eternal,
2. May this night shine (the kshetriya) away, may she shine away the witches; may the plant, destructive of
13 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who falsely claims the Warrior's title.
As he the sole God is preeminent in great. ness among all these other Gods.
Indra he offers that for the Maruts; the Maruts are the people; verily he fastens the people to him. If he
When vegetarian foods are cooked with excessive chilies, sugar, salt, etc. they become rājasic. While describing them, the word “very” can be added to all the adjectives used. Thus, rājasic foods are very bitter, very sour, very salty, very hot, very pungent, very dry, full of chillies, etc. They produce ill-health, agitation, and despair. Persons in the mode of passion find such foods attractive, but those in the mode of goodness find them disgusting. The purpose of eating is not to relish bliss through the palate, but to keep the body healthy and strong. As the old adage states: “Eat to live; do not live to eat.” Thus, the wise partake of foods that are conducive to good health, and have a peaceable impact upon the mind i.e., sāttvic foods.
And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praises to his majesty.
3 O Indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughter us:
9 To thee the mighty hymn hath clamoured loudly, and, Maghavan, the eloquent hath besought thee.
Be our protector, strengthen and increase us.May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
5 With brightly-flarning kine whose udders swell with milk, idth glittering lances on your unobstructed
16 This King is praised and honoured as Ordainer: himself the bridge, the Sage speeds o'er the waters.
27 Grant us abundant. treasures, grant the opulence which many crave,
3 1, looking to the guest of other lineage, have founded many a rule of Law and Order.
for motion; may Agni protect thee with great prosperity, with most auspicious covering; with that deity,
3. He hath, enduing thousand robes that suit him, as sacrifice upheld the light of Surya,
Leader of rites and Purifier, envoy of men, as sacrifice that still advances.
12 Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize thou their bodies and depart, O Apva.
Who have not gone to the reverential cutting of the straw.
In the close fray thou rentest him: thou stolest the Sun's wheel and didst drive away misfortunes.
4.7.3 Sukta 3 – The preparation of the Brahmaudana, the porridge given as a fee to the
Jagati metre. In that there is an oblation to Brhaspati, and Brhaspati is the holy power of the gods, verily
With thee to aid, O thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift the glorious shout for conquest.
Back from his path they drive the wolf as he would cross the restless floods. Mark this my woe, ye
The living men of Priyamedha's race have sung exalting Indra with their lauds.
2 Unite him bringing household wealth, even as a calf, with mother kine,
1. This spotted Bull hath come and sat before the mother in the east,
13. As the soma at the third pressure (evening) is dear to the Ribhus, thus in my own person, O Ribhus, lustre
19 Amrit is in the Waters in the Waters there is healing balm
While with my newest song I praise you both, O Earth, that from what moves not ye may spread forth
One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing deep within the earth's recmes.
The Asvins, Riders through the sky, have welcomed this my song of praise.
and another 3500 hymns from the Paippalada Atharvaveda Samhita edition PLUS another 2500 from
Like Bhaga must he be duly invoked by us, as he who drives the car holds fast the horse's reins.
is ambrosia, breath is life; verily with ambrosia he bestows life upon him self. It is of a hundred
Hymns call anew the chariot-borne, Eternal: by eloquence men gain abundant riches.
May Tarkshya with uninjured fellies bless us! Brihaspati bestow on us his favour! Brihaspati bestow on
They seize the flying Steer at the stream's breathing-place: cleansing with gold they grasp the Animal
they say, 'appropriates the gods.' If the Soma (sacrifice) on the other side is an Agnistoma, he should
11. Agni here is to be revered; the sun shall rise here for thee: rise thou from deep death, yea from black
3. Relax that mortal's stubborn strength whose heart is bent on wickedness.
1. Aow, quick, sage, infallible, all-knowing, I choose to be our Priest at this oblation.
is the overcomer of foes; (verily it serves) for victory. He puts on one of Vikankata; verily he wins light.
5 Yet verily the Warrior in his vigorous strength stirreth up with his might great battles for mankind;
Warding off curses, King of all existence, he shall find way for prayer the while they cleanse him.
heaven. 'Go to the sky, fly to heaven', (with these words) he takes out the gold after the offering [1];
immortality in his breath. It is of a hundred measures, man has a hundred years of life, a hundred
17 Who fleeth forth? who suffereth? who feareth? Who knoweth Indra present, Indra near us?
3 That he may bear their gifts to heaven, all glorify him Agni, God,
has brown ears; that is the symbol of the Brahman; (verily it serves) for prosperity. The sacrificial post is
low without fail. 'Let us pay homage to thee in thy highest birth, O Agni ', (with these words) he takes
3 Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kine, with fertile pastures, fain to do men service.
3 May Agni, Priest among mankind, take pleasure in our songs of praise,
great lordship, to great overlordship, to great rule over the people.
6 Flow on, best Vrtra-slayer; flow meet to be hailed with joyful lauds.
6 With passion Pavamana longs for the great lofty pair, well-formed
7 Bless us the Vajins when we call, while slowly they move, strong Singers, to the Gods' assembly.
4.11.7 Sukta 7 – Apotheosis of the Ukkhishta, the leavings of the Sacrifice
That food and strength do ye, O Maruts, bounteously bestow upon us.
5Aided by thee, O Maghavan, O Indra, may we subdue our foes who count them mighty.
Accept the sacrifice and grant us riches, leading us on by unobstructed pathways.
4 This Savitar the God, the golden-handed, Friend of the home, hath risen to meet the twilight.
g I place thee in the seat of the living, in the shadow of the helper; homage to the ocean, homage to the
9 Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above the earth.
are drawn thitherward from hence, therefore these worlds are thitherward from hence; in that in the latter
From whosoever would reproach or injure: for thou, God, rcscuest from all oppression.
6 Accept the songs we sing, accept the solemn rite. Conie nigh, O ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.
Thus Gods have stablished me in many places with many homes to enter and abide in.
Kadru and Suparni had a dispute (for the stake of) each other's form. Kadru defeated Suparni. She said,
On whom, loud-roaring, men have laid great strength as on a faithful friend.
B. Prayer to secure the return of Calves that have strayed to a distance
11 I craving joy address with hymn and homage your heavenly host, the company of Maruts,
the butter, and to Brhaspati an oblation (be offered); in that it is (offered) on eight potsherds, and the
1. With sacrifice we seek to thee fair cherisher of manly might
48. 'This is your oblation, O Brâhmanas,' thus shall he reflect, if he is supplicated, if they ask him for the sterile
16 Into the six Expanses flies the Great One in Trkadrukas.
1. May the enemy not win the debate! Thou art mighty and overpowering. Overcome the debate of those that
him, Agni produces offspring; he obtains offspring. The Brahman who despite study does not win fame
The twins, the sisters brighten him, and strengthen-these children of one damethe vigorous Racer.
6 Another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and knows the places where the treasures lie.
23 O presser, offer Soma first to Indra, Hero, Sakra, him
what good is the fire piled?' they say. 'May I be possessed of the fire' [1], (with this aim) is the fire piled;
I. This Lady, excellent and kind, after her sister shining forth, Daughter of Heaven, hath shown herself.
the metres. They obtain sovereignty who knowing thus perform (the rite) of thirty-six nights; verily they
That conquering Car, O Indra, that sets forth at dawn, that never breaks, may we ascend for happiness.
In the preceding chapter, Shree Krishna spoke of the differences between the divine and demoniac natures, to help Arjun understand the virtues that should be cultivated and personality traits that should be eradicated. At the end of the chapter, he stated that one who disregards the injunctions of the scriptures, and instead foolishly follows the impulses of the body and the whims of the mind, will not achieve perfection, happiness, or freedom from the cycle of life and death. He thus recommended that people follow the guidance of the scriptures and act accordingly. This instruction led to the present question. Arjun desires to know the nature of the faith of those who worship without reference to the Vedic scriptures. In particular, he wishes to understand the answer in terms of the three modes of material nature.
10 Make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and strong desire,
E'en from his birth-time Indra conquered Tvastar, bore off the Soma and in beakers drank it.
h In me is the Vasu, whom wealth precedeth, who guardeth the voice; guard my voice.
3. That hair of thine which does drop off, and that which is broken root and all, upon it do I sprinkle here the allhealing herb.
2. Whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the Pavamana hymns,
2. For all these holy singers thus implore these twain to succour them,
With the stalk's juice, exhilarating, resting not, into the vat that drops with meath.
they could not fly; they saw these four naturally perforated bricks, they put them down in the quarters,
2 The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like rival wives.
2.3.1.3 Mantra 3: The Anointing of the Carts and the making of the Fire
Pañcadaça (Stoma) is one eminence; the Ekavinça one eminence, the Trayastrinça one eminence. He,
8 We bring the Stay of Life, who makes the waters swell, swift-hearing, Friend of Gods, who waits on
4 We strive for glory through the powers immense of him whom many praise,
2. We choose to-day that chariot-steed of thine, the strong, that brings us bliss, the guardian, the desire
10. Here, verily, yesterday we let the thunder-wielder drink his fill.
5 Indra and Agni, mighty Lords of our assembly, crush the fiends:
3 The Priyamedhas bid you come with all the succours that are yours.
Ye, verily, make earth tremble like a ray of light what time ye bring your boons to give prosperity,
When Matarisvan rubbed forth him who lay concealed, for mixture of the sweet drink, in the days of old.
6 Theri was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, and song of joy,
7. Thou didst leave behind Arâti (the demon of grudge), didst obtain prosperity, didst enter the happy world of the
22. Turn towards her with cattle, (thou pot), face towards her, together with the divine powers! Neither curses nor
16 Pardon, we pray, this sin of ours, O Agni, -- the path which we have trodden, widely straying,
Two hundred cows from Devavan's descendant, two chariots from Sudas with mares to draw them.
19 When yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows from udders pour their milk,
h O god Savitr, bind thou in the furthest distance with a hundred fetters him who hateth us and whom we
in what?' He should offer them while wandering round; verily he appeases him completely [4]. The
c By the All-gods I win battles, with the Jagati metre, the Saptadaça Stoma, the Vamadevya Saman, the
11 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk. all Deities have drunk their fill.
2 Strong let your weapons be to drive away your foes, firm for resistance let them be.
(him); verily, instigated by Savitr, he lets loose on all sides the wrath of Varuna that is in him. He pours
Let the Gods give their gifts, and let Sunrta, Goddess, grant us wealth.
from lameness, not deformed in limb, there may we behold our parents and our children!
Refresh the way ye go, refresh the paths with meath: hither, O Asvins, bring the skin that holds the
To the praises of the Rsis and the sacrifice of men.
4. The thousand-eyed god shall put this plant into my right hand: with that do I see every one, the Sûdra as well
witchcraft is practised should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the youngest; verily he has
As 'twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy songs resound in joy. He with the ruddy-hued,
26 In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadru's Soma juice:
5. The curse shall go to the curser; joint possession shall we have with the friend. Of the enemy who bewitches
Jagati (metre), the Saptadaça (Stoma), the Vairupa (Saman), the rainy (season), (offering is made) on
8 Hither, O Maruts, come from heaven, from mid-air, or from near at hand
3 When striving man with man for glory they have met, brisk, measurcIess, eager for victory in fight,
5 These who give increase day by day, Gods without guile for mortal man,
d When on him as on a steed in swift movements,
village; verily he becomes possessed of a village. He should pile in the form of a cemetery, who desires,
After you flew your birds, marvels of beauty: dear to our hearts! the song, well lauded, reached you.
1. GREAT is this might of yours, Indra and Soma: the first high exploits were your own achievements.
1 O COME ye hither, sit ye down: to Indra sing ye forth, your song,
i So great art thou, thou art life, bestow life upon me; thou art strength, bestow strength upon me; thou
When, aiding Arjuneya, thou subduedst to him both Kuyava and the Dasa Susna.
confers radiance upon him; just as yonder sun is radiant, so he is radiant among men. He puts down ghee
shall call up to the dish: on shall come the young knowing their nest!
Thine arms, O Satakratu, are exceeding strong, arms which have grasped the thunderbolt.
22 O Asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and praises, honour you:
4.3.25 Sukta 25 – Charm to arouse the passionate love of a Woman
Be near me in the day, he near me in the night: help me to gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds.
born in accordance with the breath. The gods desired that the wives should go to the world of heaven
8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the while I hold together all existence.
offspring.' He did penance a second time, he created birds. He desired, 'May I create offspring.' He did
When, while the bowl stands there, he grooms his Tawny Steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, the
d This is your king, O Bharatas; Soma is the king of us Brahmans.
9 Thou hast established in her seat, O Indra, the level earth, vast, vigorous, unbounded.
world of heaven. The tortoise is the intelligence of animals; in that he puts down the tortoise, animals
2 Auspicious Friends to us be Bhaga, Sathsa, auspicious be Purandhi aid all Riches;
Help us achieve our desires through the straight (sinless) path, and make our daily work joyful.
31 Drive hither those, and these again bring hither: the War-drum speaks aloud as battle's signal.
Sudhanvan's Children won them everlasting life, serving with holy rites, pious with noble acts.
Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavem, and made Nrmedha rich with troops of children.
1. Rich be the praiser of one rich and liberal, Lord of days! like thee:
May this rite save me till my hundredth autumn. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
Come hither with all Deities about thee here take thy seat, the first, as Priest, O Agni.
2. The variegated worm, the four-eyed, the speckled, and the white--I crush his ribs, and I tear off his head.
Wherewith the sapient one acquired his triple lore,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
Happily be the traces bound; happily may he ply the goad.
away unto a distant region, that (people) shall behold you (i.e. him) in Yama's house devoid of strength, that they
4 Here am I, look upon me here, O singer. All that existeth 1 surpass in greatness.
8 Stronger am I than Nabus, I who slew the seven: I glorified with might Yadu and Turvaga.
8 When I, a mortal, wooed to mine embraces these heavenly nymphs who laid aside their raiment,
5 Pusan knows all these realms: may he conduct us by ways that are most free from fear and danger.
48 Winner of' power, flow, Soma, worthy of our laud: run onward to the fleece as well-beloved meath.
he, who offers knowing thus to them, in yonder world is united with what be has sacrificed and
Let Indra, Varuna, and the Adityas sit, swift Heroes, on our sacred grass.
14 Let us be helpful to others. Let us lend as much assistance to others as possible. Let us be cordial
8 Whate'er from olden time, Heaven, Earth! existeth great object of the wrath of Gods and mortals,
24 Now to the Hero fair of cheek, Adhvaryu, pour the Soma forth:
3. Do thou, poured forth by pressing- stones, flow hither uttering a roar,
4 Vasistha hath poured forth his prayers, desiring to milk thee like a cow in goodly pasture.
8 His power is matchless, matchless is his wisdom; chief, through their work, be some who drink the
He puts down the naturally perforated brick; the naturally perforated brick is this (earth); verily he puts
is of the after-shoots of rice, for it is the deity of him who is low in rank; (verily it serves) for prosperity.
Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day! have gone to heaven.
Sprung from high Law your car, urged on by press-stones, goes round the earth and heaven in one
I be secure among my equals', (with these words) he puts the enclosing-sticks round; verily he invokes
1. Graciously- minded he is flowing on his way to win dear names o'er which the youthful one grows
3 Indra, thou settest free the many waters that were encompassed, Hero, by the Dragon.
Killing the darkness at the light's foundation, the Couple newly born attain their beauty.
Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass: grant riches with a multitude of hero sons.
7 Bring lofty and resplendent fame, O thou munificent Dawn, to these
17 The Gods as mothers brought thee forth, the Immortal Sage, O Afigiras,
6 With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with power hath Indra lighted up the Sun.
prospering in a rite, then should he offer them, and in that rite he prospers. In that the All-gods brought
the neck [3] in yonder world. In that he burns, (saying) 'The loan which I have not yet paid', being here,
3. Where are ye, Gods? What mortal man, O Asvins, glows with zeal for you,
Like one who goes strai ht to the point directed, ye Nasatyas, to mine invocation.
of) gods, the lower and the higher, he gives a share. 'O bounteous one, do thou rejoice in the Antaryama',
Thou art the dear Friend of the mighty Mornings: thou shinest in glimmerings of the night.
18 For these, the bards and singers, have cried out to thee with prayer, to gain the sacrifice.
3 The men with pressing-stones have pressed this meath of yours which gives delight:
1. WINNER of thousands, kindled, thou shinest a God with Gods to-day.
1. I AM prepared to laud with song or worship the Noble Ones who are in earth and heaven,
3. Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go forth, O Soma, into Indra's throat!
4 1 praise your work that ye may make me prosper: hear, Heaven and Earth, Twain Worlds that drop
Devotees can only be elevated to the level of the entity they worship, just as water in a pipe can only rise to the level of the reservoir to which it is connected. In this verse, Shree Krishna explains the implications of worshipping different entities by revealing the varieties of destinations attained. He gives this knowledge to help us conclude that to reach the highest level of spiritual evolution we must worship the Supreme.The worshippers of Indra (the rain god),Kuber (the god of wealth), Agni (the god of fire), etc. go to the celestial abodes. Then, when their account of good karmas gets depleted, they are sent back from heaven. The Pitars are the ancestors. It is good to harbor thoughts of gratefulness toward them, but undue concern with their welfare is detrimental. Those who engage in the ancestor worship go to the abodes of their ancestors after death.Those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts and spirits. In the Western world, there is witchcraft; in Africa, there is black magic; in India, there are vām-marg tāntrics, who invoke ghosts and spirits. Shree Krishna says that persons who indulge in such things take birth amongst ghosts and spirits in their next life.The highest devotees are those who attach their minds to the Supreme Divine Personality. The word vrata means resolve and undertaking. Such fortunate souls, who firmly resolve to worship God and engage steadfastly in His devotion, go to His divine Abode after death.
potsherds; to Rudra, lord of cattle, an oblation of Gavidhuka; to Brhaspati, lord of speech, an oblation of
3 1 have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have gained son and progeny from Visnu.
3 Hence, Sapient One! the Falcon, strong of wing, unwearied, brought thee down,
These are the sons of Angirases: from Agni have they sprung to life.
3 Him have the Gods established at the region's base, doer of wondrous deeds, Herald of heaven and
7 All sacrificial viands wait on Agni as the Seven mighty Rivers seek the ocean.
Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
7 May Vatsa draw- thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwelling-place,
prosperity. They go with the Sadaha; there are six seasons; verily in the seasons they find support. The
4 Thou art a Singer, Son! our feast-companion: Agni at birth prepared his food and pathway.
And, granting to Praskanva lengthened days of life, show honour to the Heavenly Host.
makes it attain support, and unites it with the breaths. He fills (it) with curds mixed with honey, (saying)
6 Inquiring after him, thy later servants, Indra, have gained thy former old traditions.
1. O MITRA-VARUNA, guard and protect me here: let not that come to me which nests within and
Ne'er fail us one like Soma sweet, the spring of our felicity. Mark this my woe ye Earth and Heaven.
Both Hindu and Buddhist scriptures abound with analogies of the lotus flower. The word is used as a respectful appellation while describing various parts of God’s divine body. Hence charaṇ-kamal means “lotus-like feet,” kamalekṣhaṇa means “lotus-like eyes,” kar-kamal means “lotus-like hands,” etc.Another word for the lotus flower is paṅkaj, which means “born from mud.” The lotus flower grows from the mud found at the bottom of the lake, yet it rises above the water and blossoms toward the sun. Thus, the lotus flower is often used in Sanskrit literature as an example of something that is born amidst the dirt, and rises above it while retaining its beautiful purity.Further, the lotus plant has large leaves that float atop the water surface of the lake. Lotus leaves are used in Indian villages for plates, as they are waterproof, and liquid poured on them does not soak through, but runs off. The beauty of the lotus leaf is that, although the lotus owes its birth, growth, and sustenance to the water, the leaf does not permit itself to be wetted. Water poured on the lotus leaf runs off the side, due to the small hair growing on its surface.With the help of the beautiful analogy of the lotus leaf, Shree Krishna says that just as it floats atop the surface of the lake, but does not allow itself to be wetted by the water, similarly, the karm yogis remain untouched by sin, although performing all kinds of works, because they perform their works in divine consciousness.
2. Let us have good weather at noon, good weather at eve, good weather in the early morning, good weather in
is lost; in that it is (offered) to Agni, and gold is connected with Agni, by him whose is gold he gains it;
For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin: O Indra, turn us not away.
7 Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give riches to the man who brings oblations.
2 Sakra protects from woe the man who gives him sacrificial cake.
1. This warrior, O Indra, do thou strengthen for me, do thou install this one as sole ruler (bull) of the Vis (the
5 Both sides invoke him as they call on Indra when they stir forth and turn to sacrificing.
Thou in thy vigour having slaughtered Vrtra didst free the floods arrested by the Dragon.
I praise thee Bounteous Giver, Lord of heroes: give medicines to us as thou art lauded.
Him, rich in wealth, let swift Steeds bring to us, his Bays, to Soma juice for his carouse:
2 The mighty flowing Soma-draught, brought by the Hawk, hath gladdened thee,
7 This is the thought, this is the song, O Asvins: accept this hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour.
May Mitra, Aryanian, and Bhaga hear us, the mighty Varuna Daksa, and Amsa.
2 Thou art our guileless, most delightful Herald, the God, among mankind, of holy synods.
That wins with brave steeds where brave steeds encounter, and quells the Vrtras and the foes in battle.
3 Truth waits upon oblation present and to come: naught checks him in his way, this vic tory- bringing
facing north; this is the quarter of Rudra; verily he propitiates him in his own quarter. He offers on the
is connected with the Jagati, the third day is connected with the Jagati, and therefore on the third day the
When the Pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, all creatures that existed looked upon them.
4 So ye, when ye have yoked your chariothorses, come to the hymn of the most recent singer.
Come, Indra, with thy dear Bay Horses harnessed, come to our dwelling and the food thou lovest.
smote him. He said, 'Thou art called he who brings from the stronghold; bring him.' So the sacrifice bore
For thou art Lord of gathered wealth and treasure. of the bright song of praise thou art inventor.
may the good Lord (symbolized by our Agni Gârhapatya [household fire]) forgive us and guide us to perform good
down the pan and the mortar, with them the sacrificer milks the fire in yonder world.
12. Straighter than an arrow may it (the spell) fly against him, O ye heaven and earth; may that spell take hold
distance, I ween, has been fetched the very remedy for jealousy.
1. Up have risen the majestic twin stars, the vikritau ('the two looseners'); may they loosen the nethermost and the
1. Thy golden chamber, king Varuna, is built in the waters! Thence the king that maintains the laws shall loosen all
3. My lusty shout (is) as the thunder with the cloud: then do I smite thy (sap) with my strong charm. With manly
[1]; of that to thee let them give whose breath thou art; hail!
5 On far-refulgent chariot come unto the man who offers gifts:
drives away from him the enemy, the evil. He who being meet for kingship obtains not a kingdom
9 Exhaustless be your bounty to our princes who with their wealth incite the gift of riches,
c Homage to you sharpers, and to you, lords of sharpers, homage!
7 I will declare the greatness of these Maruts, their real greatness, worthy to be lauded,
Yea, at their prayer didst check the rushing river and make the floods easy to cross, O Indra.
unsurmounted, the unsurmountable', he says; for that is unsurmounted and unsurmountable. 'The force
why the Atigrahyas have their name. In that the Atigrahyas are drawn, verily thus the sacrificer bestows.
Ye all possess all majesty: all must be served in sacrifice.
Two Bowls of noble kind: between these Goddesses the God, the fulgent Sun, travels by fixed decree.
Ye give the Bharata as his strength, a charger, and ye bestow a king who quickly listens.
be consecrated; the year has twelve months and seven seasons; the Viraj is the year; he obtains the Viraj.
should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, repeller of foes; verily he has recourse to Indra, repeller
9 These Soma-eaters kiss Indra's Bay-coloured Steeds: draining. the stalk they sit upon the ox's hide.
Day with the flesh; night with the fat; the waters with the juice; ghee with the sap; ice with the fat
I win the third pressing.' He measures (the Soma) on the skin of beasts verily he wins cattle, for cattle
As from our pleasant place of rest ye rouse us may we be masters of heroic vigour.
2. He, O ye gods, who prepares a spell, and carries it to the house of one that knows not (of it), upon him the
'Do thou make me go to the world of heaven', he says; verily she makes him go to the world of heaven.
colour of guilt. Or rather of the sap which is red or which comes from the pruning one should not
would be liable to miscarriage. He deposits it fastening it on, to secure the foetuses. He fastens it so that
'Let me choose a boon. I deem that I shall be overcome through digging. Let me not be overcome by
4 Accept this laud for aid, made pure like oil, thou Caster of the Stone,
8 Come to us, Indra, and protect our car with thine intelligence.
For him who followeth thy Law the mountains and heaven and earth stand as if firmly stablished.
He, worthy of our praises, caused the Simyu, foe of our hymn, to curse the rivers' fury.
2 Longed for, most Indra-like, mighty, most Marut-like, most w6nderful in deed, car-borne, best
13. The tears which have rolled from (the eyes of) the oppressed (Brahman), as he laments, these very ones, O
4 That Matarisvan rich in wealth and treasure, light-winner, finds a pathway for his offispring.
1. SOLE Lord of wealth art thou, O Lord of riches: thou in thine hands hast held the people, Indra!
12 High, glorifier of his friend, he knows all generations, he whom many praise.
9 Agni, bestow upon our chiefs and nobles that famous power, that wealth which feedeth many.
purify themselves with butter; verily he produces whatever splendour exists. 'Too much splendour is
this blessing. Then all this comes to pass with regard to the equals of him for whom knowing thus these
Cast down thy sharpened thunderbolt, O Indra, on him who harms the men who sing thy praises.
2. On, with the sages, flows the poet on his way, and guided by the men, hath streamed into the vats.
2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her who is near in kindred as stranger.
With heroes smite the foeman and show forth our strength. O Indra, further thou our thoughts.
11 Like one forsaken, she hath found a husband, and teemed as if her breast were full and flowing.
4.7.139Sukta 139 – Charm to arouse the passionate love of a Woman
20. The Atharvans did tie it on, the descendants of the Atharvans did tie it on; with these allied, the Angiras cleft
From hips from stomach, and from groin I drive thy malady away.
To our devotion give victorious strength in war: may we win riches in the heroes' strife for spoil.
He putteth on his bright robe abandoning that of the worn-out one.
These must be slain by thee, malignant mortals, armed with ill arts, our quiverbearing foemen.
ninth for Dhatr the tenth; for Indrani the eleventh; for Aditi the twelfth; for sky and earth the side; for
singing in his mind that foundation he draws; verily he becomes possessed of a foundation. If the
holy power he quickens the kingly power, and by the kingly power the holy power; therefore a Brahman
6 For verily men sink and faint through loss of wealth which ye have given.
Agnidh's altar; the Agnidh's altar is the invincible part of the sacrifice. In that he draws off the altar fires
diverse foods. He scatters on the ploughed (ground), for in the ploughed plants find support. He scatters
33. To the descendants of the Rishis I make thee over, O porridge; those who are not descended from Rishis
20 Now, as the Bhrgus wrought a car, for Indra the Strong, the Mighty, we our prayer have fashioned,
5 Knowing the God's good-will, Devapi, Rsi, the son of Rstisena, sate as Hotar.
4. Flow with thy current to the sieve, O Sage, best giver of delight,
44. That do I know of thee, O immortal, where thy march is upon the sky, where thy habitation is in the highest
Indra, famed Hero, winner in the deadly strife, let us bring hitherward to-day to favour us.
he were to cut it so that it would touch the axle, the cattle of the sacrificer would be liable to perish. If he
Therefore whatever of the offering when taken up falls outside the enclosing-sticks, that is their portion;
2 Come now, ye Asvins, on your car decked with a sun-bright canopy,
Cheered by this magic draught ye, Indra-Varuna, made the dry places stream, made songs of praise
libations with curds mixed with honey; verily he delights them with their proper portion. Or rather they
On earth he hath shone as with the light of dawn.
8. Agni, with hymns may we now accomplish that which thou lovest,
4 Blest by the Gods, Kinvayanas! be ye who spread through life on life:
9 Agni, men seek thee as a Father with their prayers, win thee, bright-formed, to brotherhood with holy
5. Thou, Agni, art the people's light, best, dearest, seated in thy shrine
8 Deep-skilled in Law eternal, deathless, Singers, O Vajins, help us in each fray for booty.
16 Soma upon the ox's skin through the sheep's wool flows purified.
they win them. There is a Viçvajit (day), for the winning of food. It has all the Prsthas, for the conquest
Continue thou to shine on us, O Agni, with strength abundant, rich, and long enduring.
3. Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as Father of the Gods, to every form.
He drave the kine forth and cleft Vala through by prayer, dispelled the darkness and displayed the light
3 The glowing ladle, filled with oil, is lifted; choosing Gods' service to the right he circles.
on the sacrificer. 'Abode and collector of riches', he says; rich are offspring and cattle; verily he unites
Indra, to thee I sing, to Dyaus, to Rudra glorious in himself,
he practise witchcraft [6], he should put (it) down (with the words), 'I set thee down on the breath of
1. Flow onward Soma, flow for mighty strength, as a strong courser, bathed, to win the prize.
3 Auspicious are the Sun's Bay-coloured Horses, bright, changing hues, meet for our shouts of triumph.
2 Like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, and seek like eager guests your bidder's banquet.
3 Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and all the mighty floods
9 Hither, O Indu, unto us a hundred gifts of steeds, a thousand gifts of cattle and of gold,
30 O Agni, so may we, devout, gazed at by men, throughout our days,
d To the sky thee, to the atmosphere thee, to the earth thee!
Agni was the animal; with it they sacrificed; it won this world where Agni is; this is thy world, thou wilt
10 Those Stakes upon the earth with rings that deck them seem to the eye like horns of horned
8 Send us that strength, Vaisvanara, send it, Agni, that strength, O Jatavedas, full of splendour,
Your chariot cometh to the banquet of the Gods, to sacrifice, as it were home, that ye may drink.
Make us observe the stated times: give us not over to reproach.
11 By Law the Angirases cleft the rock asunder, and sang their hymns together with the cattle.
c Thou art the seat of Aditi; sit on the seat of Aditi [1].
12 Worthy to be revered, O Agni, God, preserve our wealthy patrons with thy succours, and ourselves.
When he came showing forth his majesty and power, he drank of Soma juice and waxed exceeding
3. He, being cleansed, the strengthener and increaser, bountiful Soma helped us his lustre,
[2], so that the Raksases may not creep through. He puts none in front, for the sun rises in front and
5 Accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. Come nigh, O ye Twain Gods, to all libations
Faithful and guileless, having Gods for children, leaders of sacrifice with shining splendours.
7 Lovers of Soma, bind the chariot traces fast: set ye the reins in order and embellish them.
9. Of thy dear form, O Prâna, of thy very dear form, of the healing power that is thine, give unto us, that we may
away the Raksases [4]; with a Gayatri verse he draws a line around, the Gayatri is brilliance; verily with
1. REPOSING on the river's wave the Sage hath widely flowed around,
animal, animals are food, the heads of animals are this fire; if he desire of a man, 'May his food be less'
19. O Trishamdhi, envelop thou the enemies in darkness; may not a single one of those, driven forth by the
21 This is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the lofty misty realm of Surya.
e 'Homage to Indra, slayer of Makha; injure not my power and strength'--(with these words he
oblation-holders are the mouth of the sacrifice; when they move forward the oblation-holders, then he
4 Repel all enmities and keep thern far away: let all win treasure for their own.
Prajapati, to Manu, hail! Vat! To him who approveth himself homage. Right, guardian of right, heavenbearing, hail! Vat! To him who approveth himself homage.
h For the brilliance of the Brahman, for a prop, a support, I take thee.
2 Thy mighty Stallions, yoked by prayer, O Indra, thy. Coursers to thy mighty chariot harnessed,Ascend thou these, and borne by them come hither: with Soma juice out. poured, Indra, we call thee.
7 This is thy deed, e'en this, Wonderful! Singer! that, slaying Ahi, here thy strength thou showedst,
expiration and inspiration go in different directions. The ununified part of the fire [6] is not worthy of
the kingship over them by the Rajana (Saman), and that is why the Rajana has the name. In that there is
sacrificial fee is a calf. To Savitr (he offers) on twelve potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a speckled (ox).
4.6.90 Sukta 90 – Charm against internal pain (Colic), due to the missiles of Rudra
Seeing not [1] they pass over the other with a bridge.
9 Thou, Indra, Mighty One, didst crush Usas, though Daughter of the Sky.
4. Around you has passed a great sandy dike: stand ye still, pray take your case!
a black cow with a white calf; verily by the day he bestows night upon him, by night day; verily day and
27 When Visnu, through thine energy, strode wide those three great steps of his,
He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many who were deemed his equals.
Best Angiras, bolt-armed, he strove to win, as 'twere, the stall of kine;
that it has spots on the forehead [1], verily at the beginning he bestows brilliance on him. He whom men
She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accepting day and night her lord's embraces.
Fame-loving, praised, hither to me with succour turn having yoked both vigorous Bay Horses!
29 Send forth thy voice aloud through earth and heaven, and let the world in all its breadth regard thee;
What time ye carried Bhujyu to his dwelling, borne in a ship with hundred oars, O Asvins.
11 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy fearful roar,
7 Let not the oppressor with this dread, through anger swallow me up, for I am thine, O Atri.
Come hither quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the Kanvas drink thy fill.
14 With Visnu and the Angirases attending you, and with the Maruts come unto your praiser's call.
Lead on the wild horse Indra with his vigorous grasp forward to drink the Soma juice.
Auspicious, bringing food for Gods' enjoyment, shine on us here, most bright, O Dawn, this morning.
of wealth, let (the clans) of men invest the sacrificer here.
undeceivable; the foe cannot deceive him who has piled; verily also he wins the gods.
3 To Narasamsa and to Pusan I sing forth, unconcealable Agni kindied by the Gods.
18 Pressed for the banquet of the Gods, O Soma, bring us might, and speed,
6 Come hither. I am all thine own; advancing turn thou to me, Victorious, All-supporter!
4.4.3 Sukta 3 – Shepherd’s Charm against wild beasts and Robbers
6. Soma, thou flowest chasing foes, finder of wisdom and delight: drive thou the godless folk afar!
would it go ill; if he were to make a success, for both would it go well; he draws without breathing; this
Sprung hence to life upon this All he looketh. Vaisvanara hath rivalry with Surya.
3 Hither hath Surya's Daughter brought the wild Steer whom Parjanya nursed.
Against the secret fiend cast forth his weapon, against the lying words that strangers utter.
May hymns that please thee cause the breast of Vayu to swell as with the mead's refreshing
connected with the All-gods, cook thee on the abode of earth, in the manner of Angiras, O pan.
7 His belly, drinking deepest draughts of Soma, like an ocean swells,
defeated. Having driven away these two, the gods offered to themselves,' to Indra. 'Driven away are
1. To Indra have the Soma drops, exceeding rich in sweets, been poured,
4 Whoso hath known him dwelling in his lair, and hath approached the stream of holy Law,They who release him, paying sacred rites, -truly to such doth he announce great wealth.
That Maghavan whom men must laud with singing, Heaven-dweller, King of songs, whose help is
26 So now we seek thee fresh in might, Most Wonderful in act! for gain:
1. THOUGH, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward, north and south,
19 -May Agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, Blessed One, and sacrifice bring bliss;
With sharpened arms, with swift bow, never vanquished in battle, vanquishing in fight the foemen!
he lives. He should draw full cups if rain does not fall. Pain afflicts the breaths of the people if rain does
14. May this sturdy press-stone, with broad bottom, purified by the purifiers, beat away the Rakshas! Settle upon
May he come, fair of cheek; may he not stay afar, but come and turn not from our call.
9 May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guard and shelter us,
7 Come in the ship of these our hymns to bear you to the hither shore
hath he first been established by the establishers', he says; verily he makes him the principal. 'Ye twain
3 Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy strength enter thou Indra's throat.
a O Agni, drive away those foes of ours that are born;
final bath and the cry of Godspeed!' he says, to utter Godspeed! 'May the fire for me, the cauldron', he
O active Maghavan, with eager prayer we crave the yellow-hued with store ol kine.
potsherd to Mitra and Varuna, this (offering) corresponds to his foe's cow which is to be slaughtered; his
Knowing the seasons, O lord of the season, do thou sacrifice here;
10 In dry spots he makes stream, and course, and torrent, and inundates the earth with floods that
Sought pure light and devotion, singing praises; they cleft the ground and made red Dawns apparent.
11 Guarded by Ahi stood the thralls of Dasas, the waters stayed like kine held by the robber.
Give to the singer wealth with noble heroes, and upon us bestow wide-spreading glory.
follows the deities [4]. He should not pass over the last of the embers; if he were to pass over the last of
He lightens with the roaring of Br aspati: h the lakes have not contained the pourings of juice.
To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to us-ward.
n Given by us, go to the gods, full of sweetness; enter the giver; without leaving us fare by the path
Even as thou didst waken us with Satyasravas, Vayya's, Son, high-born! delightful with thy steeds!
eleven potsherds, to Indra and Visnu on eleven potsherds, to Visnu on three potsherds; the sacrificial fee
2. This talisman slays enemies, makes strong men, is powerful, lusty, victorious, strong; as a man it advances
11 They drave the cloud transverse directed hitherward, and poured the fountain forth for thirsting
By which the men who pray, extolling Indra chief favourites of Gods, recite their praises.
to win every kind of food. He offers with an offering-spoon of Udumbara wood; the Udumbara is
birthplace. 'This is thy sacrifice, O lord of the sacrifice, with its, utterance of hymns and producing noble
through me as lord of the house, mayst thou be a good lord of the house; for a hundred winters; this
May they, the Guardians of the world, protect us, and, to show favour, drink this day our Soma.
9 Even thus, O Sarama, hast thou come hither, forced by celestial might to make the journey.
1. O Agni, God, we kindle thee, refulgent, wasting not away,
offered this sacrifice, to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, to Soma an oblation;
The impetuous, the king, slayer of Vrtra, drinker of the Soma,
Full many a morn remains to dawn upon us: in these, O Varuna, while we live direct us.
Inspire with zeal each priest at this our solemn rite; all who are skilled in singing praise.
3 Dropping with honey is your whip, Asvins, and full of pleasantness
4.6.75 Sukta 75 – Oblation for the Suppression of Enemies (Nairbadhyam Havih)
four Gayatri is, therefore he goes putting down all four feet. The Anustubh is the highest of metres, the
20 For he gave riches that surpass in greatness all the things of earth,
4 Far-seeing hath this Agni been established, deathless mid mortals, wise among the foolish.
19. Through holy disciplehood, through creative fervour, the gods drove away death. Indrajorsooth, by his holy
Hero, whose might is true, thy home is heaven: to us, O Maghavan, grant gifts of cattle.
(cup); verily he hides the cattle from Rudra, and causes the cattle to find support in the plants [2].
11 With songs they send the Mighty forth, sporting in wood, above the fleece:
They call for me, their lauds are longing for me. These my Bay Steeds bear me to these oblations.
shall protect my body on all sides, that I may obtain long life, and reach old age!
5 To you, O Asvins, came the daughter of a King, Ghosa, and said, O Heroes, this I beg of you:
Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband the eleventh man.
with the day (sâhna), and that which lasts into the next day (atirâtra), are in the ukkhishta--the soma-sacrifice also
For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, Hero, finder-out of wealth.
1. THIS spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the Mother in the east,
What wealth Aucathya craves of you, great Helpers when ye come forward with no niggard succour.
3 Whose might the very heavens regard with wonder: bright as the Sun he clothes himself with lustre.
animals.' Therefore is Rudra overlord of animals. Rudra let it go; it cleft the three citadels and drove the
May this my call bring Indra to my presence, this call to Gods composed in sacred verses.
many males among offspring. In that these Stomas are intermingled, therefore this (earth) is covered
have poured his seed, he should put one in the first layer for him and one in the last; verily he encloses
3. So help ye us to riches, great celestial and terrestrial wealth!
are in pairs. This middle layer is as it were unsupported; it is as it were the atmosphere; he puts down a
2 Him altogether praise I with the song and hymns our fathers sang, and with Nabhaka's eulogies,Him dwelling at the rivers' source, surrounded by his Sisters Seven.
its eleven syllables.' 'What by the twelfth?' 'The Jagati with its twelve syllables.' So much is there as that.
then neither finished nor not begun. 'Thou art the birthplace of Agni', he says, for that is the birthplace of
3 Three times a day in thee are shown the treasures sent for the mortal who presents oblation.
So may the Twain who work with newest succours bring yoked teams hitherward to us and riches.
40 Forunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and may we also be exceeding wealthy.
The Sage, the Sovran, guest of men, our vessel fit for their mouth, the Gods have generated.
Rich, Asura! in sacred food and children, in full assembly, wealth broad-based and during.
Hence I, O Indra Maghavan, invoke thee: thou art our Providence, even as a Father.
5. Enter, O in-breathing and out-breathing, like two bulls into a stable: this person shall here flourish, an
11 May 1ndra, with the Marut host, with Tvastar, Mitra, Aryaman,
11 The rivers played, through his impetuous splendour, since with his bolt he compassed them on all
3. By song, as 'twere' the powerful bolt which none may parry, was prepared:
5 They, the ten sisters, on the lap of Aditi, have sent him forward like a car from both the arms.
The stedfast mountains shook in agitation . the waters flowed, and desert spots were flooded.
He who gives daily light through this God's wisdom, strong as a dread wild beast, and inoffensive.
3 Bright God, whose look is free from stain like Surya's, thou, swift, what time thou earnestly desirest,
which has been piled up these oblations, the cruel fire would spring up in wrath, and injure the offspring
5. Drive far away these Kanvas, the effacers of life! Where the dark regions are, there have I made these flesheaters go.
2. Downward blows the wind, downward burns the sun, downward the cow is milked: downward shall thy ailment
8. Daily, never failing, shall we bring (oblations to thee), O Gâtavedas, (as if fodder) to a horse standing (in the
The gods said to Mitra, 'Let us slay Soma, the king'; he replied, 'Not I; for I am the friend of all'; they
4 Come to us hither from the heavens, come from mid-air, well-loved by us:
With chariot all aflame compass him round about: O Rudras, cast away the foeman's deadly bolt.
3. Let brother not hate brother. Let sister not hate sister. Let the family-members be united in heart, be of one
13 Fly, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and kingfisher.
o Of the seasons the autumn I delight; delighted may it delight me.
Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us luck that finds great wealth, O Indra.
theologians say, 'For what reason does the Manthin vessel not go to the Sadas?' 'It is the vessel of
So that on both sides fostering seed and offspring, the Gods may joy in Holy Law's fulfilment?
The living men, the mighty, have impelled the Sage into the waters' lap, the place of sacrifice.
8 Agni, may it be dear to thee, most grateful, and exceeding sweet:
10. This Lord of many holy laws, even at his birth engendering strength,
2. To this stable the cattle shall flow together, Brihaspati skilfully shall conduct them hither! Sînîvâlî shall conduct
Whom Kanva, whom Medhyatithi made the source of wealth, and Vrsan and Upastuta.
13 Soma who gives success goes forth, goes to the gathering place of Gods,
metre; the course metre; the space metre; the strength metre; the maker of strength metre; the expansive
13 With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening things wherewith,
In thy right hand, O Indra, bring us treasures: thou art the Lord of rivers filled with riches.
The Maruts, bounteous Givers, sending forth their voice, in the wild joy of Soma wrought their glorious
14 Thou radiant mover of sweet sounds, with wealth of horses and of kine
15 Drink ye of our libations, grant protection, O ye Asvins Twain,
4 Lord of the brave, to thee proceed these drops of Soma juice expressed,
5 Ye from cyavana worn with age removed his skin as 'twere a robe.
20 On, with the prudent singers, flows the ancient Sage and guided by the men hath roared about the
51. The earth upon whom the biped birds fly together, the flamingoes, eagles, birds of prey, and fowls; upon
5 When Surya mounted on your car that rolls for ever rapidly,
Shree Krishna tells Arjun that the ancient science being imparted to him is an uncommonly known secret. Secrecy in the world is maintained for two reasons: either due to selfishness in keeping the truth to oneself, or to protect the abuse of knowledge. The science of Yog remains a secret, not for either of these reasons, but because it requires a qualification to be understood. That qualification is revealed in this verse as devotion. The deep message of the Bhagavad Gita is not amenable to being understood merely through scholasticism or mastery of the Sanskrit language. It requires devotion, which destroys the subtle envy of the soul toward God and enables us to accept the humble position as his tiny parts and servitors.Arjun was a fit student of this science because he was a devotee of the Lord. Devotion to God can be practiced in any of the five sequentially higher bhāvas, or sentiments: 1) Śhānt bhāv: adoring God as our King. 2) Dāsya bhav: the sentiment of servitude toward God as our Master. 3) Sakhya bhāv: considering God as our Friend. 4) Vātsalya bhāv: considering God as our Child. 5) Mādhurya bhāv: worshipping God as our Soul-beloved. Arjun worshipped God as his Friend, and so Shree Krishna speaks to him as his friend and devotee.Without a devotional heart, one cannot truly grasp the message of the Bhagavad Gita. This verse also invalidates the commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita written by scholars, jñānīs, yogis, tapasvīs, etc., who lack bhakti (devotion) toward God. According to this verse, since they are not devotees, they cannot comprehend the true import of the supreme science that was revealed to Arjun, and hence their commentaries are inaccurate and/or incomplete.
2 Three are the fellies in your honey-bearing car, that travels after Soma's loved one, as all know.
for which we have come to pray you, be granted. May we become happy and prosperous.
1.1.25 Mantra 25 – Varuna (Authors: Sunahsepa Ajigarti; later Devarata Vaisvamitra)
8 Resting in you, O Gods, we are like men who fight in coats of mail.
M. Bergaigne is of opinion that the hymn has a mystical meaning, Agastya being identifiable with the
20 Agni is Pavamana, Sage, Chief Priest of all the Races Five:
4. Thy thunderbolt, O Indra, who hast been driven forward swiftly by thy two bay steeds, shall advance, crushing
Seeking the light, with hymns to thee, O Indra, the Kusikas have brought their gift, the singers.
(it) from below verily he generates it. The theologians say, 'For what reason does the Gayatri, the least
a Surya, the god, for those that sit in the sky, Dhatr for lordly power, Vayu for offspring, Brhaspati for
Raining it down, O Maghavan, day after day, thou gainest thy surpassing might.
Here let them stay prolific, many-coloured, and yield through many morns their milk for Indra.
Eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones within the depth, and let them sink without a sound.
the wind. 'Thou art the ocean, full of mist', he says; that is the form of the wind; verily by the form he
Grant wealth to us when thou art standing upright as when reposing on this Mother's bosom.
e Homage to him of a thousand eyes, and to him of a hundred bows.
with an Anustubh verse; all the metres are the Anustubh [2], Agni's dear body is the metres; verily he
3. O valiant hero, boldly win thousandfold spoil with Kanva's sons!
Let us keep those who hate us at a distance, and haste to meet the man who sacrifices.
Continually, for our share we come4 Wealth, highly lauded ere reproach hath fallen on it, which is laid,
whom these are put down, nor he who knows them thus. The pots and the pans make pairs, for the
Ukthya, with the Trayastrinça (Stoma) with verses addressed to the All-gods, for rest. There is an
Come, Vasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared: rejoice thee, gracious, with our songs.
These who are ever new and fresh and youthful. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
Every action has defects, just as fire is covered by smoke. When we walk on the earth, we unknowingly kill millions of tiny living entities. In our occupational duties, no matter how careful we are in the fulfillment of our duties, we still end up harming the environment and hurting others. Even if we eat a cup of yogurt, we still incur the sin of destroying the living entities that reside in it. Some religious sects try to reduce this involuntary killing by tying a cloth over their mouth. Even this does not fully eliminate the destruction of living entities in our breath.When we perform our actions with the intention of fulfilling our self-interest, we are culpable for the sins we commit, knowingly or unknowingly. In accordance with the law of karma, we have to reap their karmic reactions. Good works can also be binding because they oblige the soul to go to the celestial abodes to enjoy their results. Thus, both bad and good karmas result in the continuity of the cycle of birth and death. However, in this verse, Shree Krishna gives a simple solution for destroying all karmic reactions of work. He uses the word sanyās yog, meaning renunciation of selfishness. He says that when we dedicate our actions for the pleasure of the Lord, we are freed from the fetters of both good and bad results.Those who establish themselves in such consciousness are called yog yuktātmā (united in consciousness with God). Such yogis become jīvan mukt (liberated in consciousness) even in this body. And, upon leaving their mortal frame, they receive a divine body and eternal service in the divine Abode of God.
6 Praised by the sacred bards, this God dives into waters, and bestows
7 The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our ten-fold branching hands,
25. Purified by the purifiers, the (waters) flow pure from the clouds, they reach to the spaces of heaven, and of the
d With the sacrifice I summon the cooked food [1] to thee, O offering.
world! He said, 'Yes.' (He replied), 'Let us make a compact; let me enter thee.' 'If thou dost enter me, in
Rudras, in unison with the Adityas, in unison with the All-gods, in unison with the gods, in unison with
offspring with pain; in that he puts down water, he soothes his pain; neither Adhvaryu nor sacrificer
Bringing refreshment to the liberal devotee, yea, all things to the worshipper who pours the juice.
8. To the animals of the earth and those of heaven, to the wild beasts of the forest, to the winged birds, do we
Lovely was Surya's robe: she came to that which Gatha had adorned.
1. Against the devouring demons who, in the night of the full-moon, have arisen in throngs, may Agni, the strong,
Heroes on heroes send abundantly to us, when thou omnipotent through prayer seekest my call.
7. Whether thou hast been prepared by the gods, or hast been prepared by men, we lead thee back with the help
5 Destroy this ass, O Indra, who in tones discordant brays to thee:
1. HE whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice, of one accord, bring hither,
1. INDRA, the poets with. their hymns extol this hero might of thine:
1. Hitherward have the Somas streamed, the drops while they are purified:
Like the chief consort of a King riches and strength proceed from thee.
mixed with barley [2]; barley is strength, the sounding-holes are the vital airs; verily he places strength
Make the Sun visible, make food abundant, slaughter the foes, pierce through and free the cattle.
20 Which, teeming, have received thee as a life-germ, Indra, with their mouth,
purifies (him) with five stalks [7]; the Pankti has five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he
As trunks of trees, what time the axe hath felled them, low on the earth so lies the prostrate Dragon.
not leave thee! Thy (life's) spirit do we call back to thee.
that the Hotr addresses the Adhvaryu, he makes the thunderbolt advance towards him; he turns towards
o Homage to you that sleep, and to you that wake homage!
8 The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like cattle from the stall,Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital breath, O man.
8 Like as the wind, like as the wood, like as the sea is set astir,
3. This Indra is our gracious friend. He sends, like a full-streaming cow,
1. By Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith is oblation offered up.
The praise-hymn of eternal Law, arousing, glowing, hath oped the deaf ears of the living.
2 What child is this thou carriest as handmaid, O Youthful One? The Consort-Queen hath bome him.
3 He who hath only wish as his possession casts on himself, casts foam amid the waters.
b Thou art he who is appropriated; make our food full of sweetness for us; to all the powers of sky and
9. Him that flies in the air, him that moves across the sky, him that regards the earth as his resort, that Pisâka do
4 Now is there treasure for the man who serves you, now for the hero, Dawns! who brings oblation;
Where at the votary's store my friend Vrsakapi hath drunk his fill. Supreme is Indra over all.
5 Unripe in mind, in spirit undiscerning, I ask of these the Gods' established places; For up above the
15 We have received four thousand head of cattle presented by the Rusamas, O Agni.
drives away the Raksases from Agni when born. He puts on one of Açvattha wood; of trees the Açvattha
'mind', to obtain the two libations; with two (he offers), for support. As the beginning of the sacrifice is
Unite your person with that of your husband and continue to rule over the household all your life.
26 When eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern of the Bull,
5 May I with praise-songs win that Rudra's favour who is adored with gifts and invocations.
Ascending to the lofty height of Order, the bands of singers 'sip the sweets of Amrta.
4 Thy glory, Agni, I adore, kindled, exalted in thy strength.
6 When he hath drqnk its gladdening drops, the God with vigour of a God
3 All Deities of one accord have come that they may drink of thee:
Observed of all was that your rapid going, whereby ye were the Lords of Siirya's Daughter.
1. We call on thee, O matchless one. We, seeking help, possessing nothing firm ourselves.
6 When also for a mortal man, Indra, thou speddest forth the Sun,
him he undertakes the vow. At the full moon be undertakes his vow with the (strewing of the) straw,
strength of waters and plants, protection of all life, extending; homage to the way!
2 Him, Agni, Gods and men have made their chief support, who drinks the fatness and completes the
Like one who fights, the roaring of the mighty, thus Soma Pavamana sends his current.
To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest: Touch not our offspring, injure not our heroes.
among the gods; verily by the subjects among the gods he wins for him the subjects among men; (the
1. Lord! We bring to you our adoration! Lead us through the righteous path to riches.
3. Men severally, contemplating it profoundly, behold its action upon the earth: from the fire and from the wind the
h Thou art the winged bird, sit on the earth; sit on the ridge of earth; with thy blaze fill the atmosphere,
is born after it as the night. These two Mahiman (cups) surround on either side the horse. As Haya
b Thou art the breath of the Açvins; of that to thee let the two give whose breath thou art; hail! Thou art
17 OUrmya, bear thou far away to Darbhya this my hymn of praise,
5 With wondrous might thou blewest enchanter fiends away, with powers celestial those who called on
i Thou, whom this sharp axe hath brought forward for great good
bestowal of wealth, then do thou, mighty, distribute wealth among us!
3. Adhvaryu, to the filter lead the Soma juice expressed with stones: make thou it pure for Indra's drink.
3 How heareth Indra offered invocation? How, hearing, marketh he the invoker's wishes?
3. The two arms of Indra, the protector, do we place round about us: let him protect us! O god Savitar, and king
And, like a rushing flood, loosed quickly, burneth, swift as a guilty thief, o'er desert places.
9 The Waters I this day have sought, and to their moisture have we come:
7 For ye were ever nigh to deal forth ample wealth, to give the wealth that ye had gathered up.
25 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Pavamanas in a stream,
19 May we gain wealth, subduing with thy succour and with the Arya, all our foes, the Dasyus.
19 Alone, when Indra Maghavan is lauded, he slayeth many ne'er-resisted Vrtras.
(offerings); he offered them; then indeed were the gods victorious over the Asuras; in that they were
3. From every side, O Soma, for our profit, pour thou forth four seas.
2 For at Gods' worship they are best through vigour; they have become the strongest of the Heroes;
gods dwell, who knowing this bestrews the fire. 'The sacrificer should win both beasts of the wild and of
3. May he stand near us in our need with all abundance, for our wealth:
Wearing him as a mantle, Earth and Heaven grow strong by food of pleasant drink and fatness.
10 One car-wheel of the Sun thou rolledst forward, and one thou settest free to move for Kutsa.
19 Those that come hitherward they call departing, those that depart they call directed hither.
Bring the Gods hither, thou of many aspects: turn hitherward Aramati the Holy.
accepted it (saying), 'Let Indra place power (indriya) in us.' By means of the third in the atmosphere
He covers both all-fostering worlds with praises even as a woman cherishes her children.
Because we know thee, hero, Lord of cattle: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches!
f Agni, lord of the house, Soma, all-winning, Savitr the wise; hail!
5 Atri and Bharadvaja and Gavisthira, Kanva and Trasadasyu, in our fight he helped.
sacrificer higher than the man who does not sacrifice; therefore the sacrificer is higher than the man who
Therefore the Rudras are murderous, for they have no support. Therefore they say, 'The midmost day of
Pondering what is dearest and most noble, I long to see the sages full of wisdom.
2 O Gods, Adityas, well ye know the way to keep all woes afar.
He comes with heavenly seed that makes the water swell: him for wide-spreading shelter we implore
(horse) men. The birthplace of the horse, indeed, is the sea, its kindred is the sea.
3 Sole Ruler, thou art Sovran of this world of life, O Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.
11 Holy and sweet, while purified, this Indu flows on, a wave of pleasant taste, to Indra,Strength-winner, Treasure-finder, Life. bestower.
Grâhi has seized thee, may these gods remove her by means of their charm!
4 From Hotar's cup and Potar's he hath drunk and joyed: the proffered food hath pleased him from the
2 In its wild joy Indra hath proved him faithful, faithful in quaffing, faithful in its friendship.
(it) of three thousand when piling for the third time [2]; yonder world is commensurate with three
verily he has recourse to Vayu with his own share [2], and he causes him to attain wealth. To sky and
10 Renowned is he when conquering and when slaying: 'fis he who winneth cattle in the combat.
5 These Somas are for wealth of countless cattle, renown therefor, and mighty strength immortal.
4.1.12 Sukta 12 – Prayer to Lightning, conceived as the cause of fever, headache, and cough
May thy mind run after me as a calf after the cow, as water along its course!
prosperity for him in this world. He should perform an intermediate consecration broader at the top than
Robed in the flood, the Mighty One hath clad himself with milk and settled in the vats.
12 Indra who wins the friend hath spread himself to drink the Soma-draught:
2. From thy ears, from thy kankûshas the earpain, and the neuralgia--every disease of the head do we charm
Agnistoma, so that the sacrifice may have its body. All the deities were alike, and were not
with like strength', they say; verily with that for Agni he bestows light on this world, with that for Indra
4 This kinsman in your dwellingplace speaks pleasant words: give car to this, ye Rsis, children of the
were sap; verily with the sap of the metres he wins the sap which is relatives. He who desires splendour
and inspiration. The Upançu and the Antaryama (cups) are expiration and inspiration, the Upançu
Lords of all wealth, Immortal, furtherers of prayer, grant us a triply-guarding refuge from distress.
The use of the word heart does not imply the physical machine housed in the chest that pumps blood in the body. The Vedas state that one’s physical brain resides in the head, but the subtle mind resides in the region of the heart. That is the reason why in love and hatred one experiences pain in the heart. In this sense, the heart is the source of compassion, love, sympathy, and all the good emotions. So when Shree Krishna mentions doubts that have arisen in the heart, he means doubts that have arisen in the mind, which is the subtle machine that resides in the region of the heart. In the role of being the Spiritual Master of Arjun, the Lord has imparted to his disciple the knowledge of how to gain insightful wisdom from the practice of karm yog. He now advises Arjun to utilize both wisdom and faith to cleave out the doubts from his mind. Then, he gives the call of action and asks Arjun to rise up and do his duty in the spirit of karm yog. The dual instructions to both refrain from action and to engage in action still create confusion in Arjun’s mind, which he reveals in the opening of the next chapter.
7 With service for chief bliss I seek the Lord of Sacrifice, Agni, whom
6 The hero never checked by men hath gained his strength through Indra, he
4. We offer reverence to thee from the east, from the north, and from the -south; from (every) domain, and from
The gods desiring glory performed a sacrificial session bounded by success; to Soma the king among
8. For thou--come to the worshipper!--wilt find great wealth to make us rich.
Will not the Inspirer speed our prayers to gain their end? Him with the radiant glance 1 laud with this my
On hearing Bheeshma’s call for battle, everyone in the Kaurava army also started playing various instruments eagerly, creating tumultuous sound. Shaṅkhāḥ means conches, paṇav are drums, ānak kettledrums, bhreyah bugles, and go-mukh are blowing horns. All these instruments playing together created a loud pandemonium.
Let all our foes be turned and driven backward. Hear this, O Heaven and Earth, ye All-producers.
Like the bold hero Cyavana, O Agni, mayst thou subdue the men who long for battle.
sacrifice comes to ruin; as the sacrifice comes to ruin the sacrificer comes to ruin along with it; in that he
Whom strong and vigorous and swiftlymoving, subdued by love, the Deities gave to Surya.
7 When Soma streams together unto Indra flow like waters to the river, rivulets to the lake,
Thou, Bull, hast made us strength which none may conquer, strength that shall overcome all other
4 Whate'er we speak this day to thee, Wise, Wondrous God whom many praise,
possessions', he says; Tvastr is the form-maker of the pairings of cattle; verily he places form in cattle.
39 He, being cleansed, the Strengthener and Increaser, Soma the Bounteous, helped us with his lustre,
Bhaga the deity; Hasta the Naksatra, Savitr the deity; Citra the Naksatra, Indra the deity; Svati the
number twenty four; verily he delights the half-months. He should perform an awl-shaped intermediate
Your golden fellies scatter drops of moisture: drinking the sweetness ye atend the Mornings.
6 O Mighty Ones, ye gave Sudas abundant food, brought on your treasure-laden car;
7 The one departeth and the other cometh: unlike in hue day's, halves march on successive.
O Indra, a good and ample road; crush, O Maghavan, the lusty power of our enemies!
12 Like some rich Lord of men may he, Agni the banner of the Gods,
the winning of both. Then he offers these oblations; these gods are the lords of growth; verily they
having slain Vrtra and being above the other deities; in that (the cup) for Mahendra is drawn, so the
10 So seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief Lover of the Song,
When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to face in war,
1. THIS was the task. Appear promptly, ye prudent Ones. Here is the chariot drawn by strong steeds:
12 A horse's tail wast thou when he, O Indra, smote on thy bolt; thou, God without a second,
Him the displeasure of the famous moves not, outrage and scorn affect not such a mortal.
1. INDRA, whose right hand wields the bolt, we worship, driver of Bay Steeds seeking sundered
1. O KING, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for strength, is manifest in beauty.
To him our songs shall yield themselves like spouses, to him the most delightful of the Heroes.
Both these are his, as his they are the Lords of both: both toil; belonging unto both they prosper well.
O Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou the willing Gods whose Chief is Indra.
Go to heaven by the paths which lead to the gods;
a Thou art the step of Visnu, overcoming hostility, mount the Gayatri metre, step along the earth,
2.5.4.5 Mantra 5: The Anointing with Butter and the Libation to Viçvakarman
Thee, widely-reaching, homed in sacred oil, invoked, effulgent, have they made the Eye that stirs the
9. Thine are these Soma juices, thine, Indra, those still to be expressed:
4 Indra and Agni, Friends of Law, served with rich gifts, your speech is kind
3 They for the two Nasatyas wrought a light car moving every way:
Three-seated, opulent, bestowing all delight: may it bring weal to us, to cattle and to men!
Dawn, at her rising, urges forth the living him who is dead she wakes not from his slumber.
16 Eager for booty, craving strength and horses, we-singers stir Indra, the strong, for friendship,
1. Fly forth, ye apakit (sores), as an eagle from the nest! Sûrya (the sun) shall prepare a remedy, Kandramâs (the
8 Extolled, he bends not to the strong, the steadfast, nor to the bold incited by the Dasyu.
May we obtain firm ground and room for resting: Glory to Heaven, the lofty habitation!
So may we, through your friendship for the worshipper, subdue the fiends.
6 Indu sends forth a voice on high to regions of the sea of air,
14 Guide us, Sarasvati, to glorious treasure: refuse us not thy milk, nor spurn us from thee.
The. King is passing through the filter with a roar: they drain the milk of heaven from him who looks on
4 This claims your notice, Bounteous Gods! - oblation, Asvins! and our love,
the two hornless tawny ones for the All-gods; the speckled for the Maruts; the black goat for Agni the
16 Not the deep-flowing flood, O Much-invoked One! not hills that compass thee about restrain thee,
8. May we, inhabiting a meath-rich dwelling, increase our wealth, and think of thee, O Indra!
2 When shall thy glory as a God, Agni, be suddenly shown forth.
On me as on a Father living creatures call; I deal enjoyment to tho. man who offers gifts.
1. Indra and Agni, in your deeds of might ye deck heaven's lucid realms:
g (By it) I have driven away harsh speech, (by it) I have driven away angry speech. Hail!
2. Laud Indra, richest of the rich, who ruleth over noblest wealth,
The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. After thy Godhead hast thou waxed.
To that deity whom the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer overlook do they fall victims; he should draw the
21 The singers with their thoughts and hymns have, in the stream of sacrifice,
golden germ is Prajapati; (verily it serves) for likeness to Prajapati. This (animal) is slain to make up all
Viçvakarman, lord of the quarters, may he protect our cattle, may he protect us, to him homage!
1. Sing praise to him, the Lord of light. The Gods have made the God to be their messenger,
is a beginning of the sacrifice; in that he pours butter over the gold disk, he smites away the Raksases
7 Combined in close society sit the seven priests, the brother-hood,
3 Vasistha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all.
becomes first for whom these are placed on the east as the beginning (of the sacrifice), and his son is
May Indra, Visniu, Varuna, Mitra, Agni produce auspicious days, the Wonder-Workers.
4 Creator of the heaven, creator of the earth, O Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.
5. Best giver of delight, flow on anointed with the milk for balm,
Eaters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, who travel with the Deities and Indra.
10. Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream in due succession through the ample fleece.
3 In the wild joy of Soma I demolished Sambara's forts, ninety-and-nine, together;
possessed of sight. In that there are two for Agni, he restores his eyes for him; in that there is (an
Surya ascended to the wide expanses, beholding deeds of men both good and evil.
The Puranas describe that when God first created the universe, He manifested the first-born Brahma and entrusted him with the work of further creation. Brahma was bewildered by the task of creating the materials and the life-forms in the universe from the subtle material energy. Then God revealed knowledge unto him, which is called the Chatuḥśhlokī Bhāgavat (the four-versed Bhagavatam), on the basis of which Brahma proceeded to create the world. Its first verse states very emphatically:ahamevāsamevāgre nānyadyatsadasat parampaśhchādahaṁ yadetachcha yo ’vaśhiṣhyeta so ’smyaham (Bhagavatam 2.9.32)Shree Krishna tells Brahma: “I am all that is. Prior to creation, I alone existed. Now that creation has come about, whatever is in the form of the manifested world is my very self. After dissolution, I alone will exist. There is nothing apart from Me.”The above truth implies that the material with which we worship is also God. When people venerate the holy Ganges, they immerse the lower half of their body in the river. Then they lift water in their palms and pour it into the Ganges. In this way, they use the Ganges water itself to worship it. Similarly, when God is all that exists, then the material for worshipping Him is also non-different from Him. Thus, as previously stated in verses 16 and 17, Shree Krishna reveals that He is the Vedas, the sacrificial fire, the syllable “Om,” the clarified butter, and the act of offering. No matter what the form and sentiment of our devotion, there is nothing apart from God that we can offer to Him. Nevertheless, it is the sentiment of love that pleases God, not the material of the offering.
off from the world of heaven, nor sever the animals from the chips. He who piling the fire steps down on
3 Not even all the gathered Gods conquered thee, Indra, in the war,
8. He, worshipful House-Friend, in his home is worshipped, our own auspicious guest, lauded by sages.
6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath joined to ours his wishes,Before him even afar the foe must tremble: low before him must bow all human glories.
Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himself, the way.
rite, and three in the Ahina, the sacrifice would be upset. There are three Upasads in the one-day rite,
Dwelling in wood as Varuna in rivers, lavishing treasure he distributes blessings
16 As we, O Priest observant, have elected thee this day, what time the solemn sacrifice began,
Even when hid among the tribes of Sages numerous as stars.
3 May he whose head is flaming burn the demons, haters of prayer, so that the arrow slay them.
13 Agni is even as a bull who whets and brandishes his horns.
They have sung many a Brhati of sacrifice, poured forth the worshipper's many thoughts.
Thou art a Son to him who duly worships thee, and as a trusty Friend thou guardest from attack.
6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through, the guardian of the cattle.
having raised him with day and night [4] he supports him with the breaths. Sitting he puts (it) on;
Thou who acceptest praise come glorified by hymns, come thou to us benevolent.
3 For he is mental power, a man, and perfect; he is the bringer, friend-,like, of the wondrous.
Then downward to the nether stone's fixt place they sink, and, splendid as the Sun, effuse their copious
Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up: chase them away from us, pierce the voracious ones.
l Protect me in front, protect me at the side, protect me from behind; from the quarters protect me; from
Effecting, for our aid, both union and release, Indu, like Surya, follows closely after Dawn.
should sacrifice with the Sautramani; verily collecting power and strength he places them in himself.
The matrons with their odorous sweetsthese, one and all, we lull to sleep.
nor fever heat slays. By them he led him on, and as he gaped Agni and Soma went forth from him. Then
29. The sterile cow, even when she rambles freely, is a treasure deposited for the gods. Make evident thy true
What time, Nasatyas, with his mouth he stirs the spotless flame for you.
cows; they, milking desires, wait upon him yonder in yonder world.
6 Bring forth the Men who rain down boons, O Indra: exert thee in the great terrestrial region;
7 For Puru thou hast shattered, Indra ninety forts, for Divodasa thy boon servant with thy bolt, O
2 Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, Agni: as Comrade thou winnest all living things.
4 Ye, O ye Gods, are verily our kinsmen as such be kind to me who now implore you.
Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his murdering dart afar.
1. I TRUST in thy first wrathful deed, O Indra, when thou slewest Vrtra and didst work to profit man;
Provident, guarding well the world of spirits, true to eternal Law, the debt-exactors.
With prayer and holy hymn they burst them open: the heroes' calling on the Gods was fruitful.
13 Come hither to enjoy the gifts prepared with cry of Glory! Come,
They with their songs cleft e'en the mountain open and willingly disclosed the stall of cattle.
unites him, for atonement. If he were to unite him with sherds of domestic pots, he would afflict
And all the splendid fame that the Five Tribes enjoy, bring, yea, all manly powers at once!
Better the speaking than the silent Brahman: the liberal friend outyalues him who gives not.
Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatness: lie is a God below, a God above us.
Meditation requires the dual process of removing the mind from the world and fixing it on God. Here, Shree Krishna begins by describing the first part of the process—taking the mind away from the world. Thoughts of worldly things, people, events, etc. come to the mind when it is attached to the world. Initially, the thoughts are in the form of sphurṇā (flashes of feelings and ideas). When we insist on the implementation of sphurṇā, it becomes saṅkalp. Thus, thoughts lead to saṅkalp (pursuit of these objects) and vikalp (revulsion from them), depending upon whether the attachment is positive or negative. The seed of pursuit and revulsion grows into the plant of desire, “This should happen. This should not happen.” Both saṅkalp and vikalp immediately create impressions on the mind, like the film of a camera exposed to the light. Thus, they directly impede meditation upon God. They also have a natural tendency to flare up, and a desire that is a seed today can become an inferno tomorrow. Thus, one who desires success in meditation should renounce the affinity for material objects. Having described the first part of the process of meditation—removing the mind from the world—Shree Krishna then talks of the second part. The mind should be made to reside upon God. He says this will not happen automatically, but with determined effort, success will come slowly. Determination of resolve that is in accordance with the scriptures is called dhṛiti. This determination comes with conviction of the intellect. Many people acquire academic knowledge of the scriptures about the nature of the self and the futility of worldly pursuits. But their daily life is at variance with their knowledge, and they are seen to indulge in sin, sex, and intoxication. This happens because their intellect is not convinced about that knowledge. The power of discrimination comes with the conviction of the intellect about the impermanence of the world and the eternality of one’s relationship with God. Thus utilizing the intellect, one must gradually cease sensual indulgence. This is called pratyāhār, or control of the mind and senses from running toward the objects of the senses. Success in pratyāhār will not come immediately. It will be achieved through gradual and repeated exercise. Shree Krishna explains next what that exercise involves.
4 A wicked person who maligns others by his speech, thinks ill of others, refrains from charity,
wood, for that is heavenly. They should have wheels, for gaining the world of heaven. The sacrificial
8. This great goddess earth, kindly disposed, shall receive the (sacrificial) skin! Then may we go to the world of
1.9.86 Mantra 86 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Atri Bhauma, Grtsamada Saunaka, Akrsta
4 His, through his might, are these snow-covered mountains, and men call sea and Rasa his
In this verse, Shree Krishna lists the things that disturb one’s peace, and then asks Arjun to give them up.Material desires. The moment we harbor a desire, we walk into the trap of greed and anger. Either way, we get trapped. So the path to inner peace does not lie in fulfilling desires, but instead in eliminating them.Greed. Firstly, greed for material advancement is a great waste of time. Secondly, it is an endless chase. In developed countries, very few people are deprived of enough to eat and wear, and yet they remain disturbed; this is because their hankering is still unsatisfied. Thus, those who possess the wealth of contentment possess one of the biggest treasures of life.Ego. Most of the quarrels that erupt between people stem from the ego. Mark H McCormack, author of What They Don’t Teach You At Harvard Business School writes: “Most corporate executives are one giant ego, with a couple of arms and legs sticking out.” Statistics reveal that a majority of executives, who lose their jobs in the senior management level, do so not because of professional incompetence, but because of interpersonal issues. The way to peace is not to nurture and increase pride, but to get rid of it.Proprietorship. The feeling of proprietorship is based upon ignorance because the whole world belongs to God. We came empty-handed in the world, and we will go back empty-handed. How then can we think of worldly things as ours?
Singing his psalm, well-skilled in song, a Chanter, be comes as 'twere to his friend's sister roaring.
5 Soon as this Dasyu's traces were discovered, as she who knows her home, he sought the dwelling.
1. INDRA and Agni, surely ye as Conquerors will give us wealth,
His bolt and team hath he prepared, and stablished the heaven for quadrupeds and men two-footed.
10 Run and outspeed the two dogs, Sarama's offspring, brindled, four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway.
make an offering to Indra and Agni on eleven potsherds. Verily Indra and Agni he has recourse to with
1. ASVINS, your ancient priest invites you hither to gladden you with draughts of meath of Soma.
3 Yea, and thou art the Asvins' Friend, the Mother of the Kine art thou:
Truly she fo1loweth the path of Order, nor faileth, knowing well, the heavenly quarters.
20. May their weapons fall from their (hands), may they be unable to lay the arrow on (the bow)! And then (our)
In the mid-air establishing his greatness, he cries aloud, seed of the vigorous courser.
7 Our hopes rest on the Faithful One: in Indra is the people's life.
1.2.8 Mantra 8 – Agni (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
9 Smite with thy weapons those of evil speech and thought, devouring demons, whether near or tar
When, Indra, Thunderer, Marut-girt, thou slewest Vrtra in thy strength, lauding thine own imperial sway.
This Indra, even your Wondrous God who checks attack, who joys in the delicious juice.
17 Easily have the living drops, made beautiful, approached the lake,
9 Agni to whom the oil is shed by him thou lovest to support,
heart; may they love me with their hearts; make them of one mind with me; hail! Thou [1] art affection;
Gape widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour: let all the Vasus sit this day beside thee.
6 Him, duly coming as their germ, have plants received: this Agni have maternal Waters brought to life.
34. In sixty autumns the treasurer (of the porridge) shall fetch it, by the cooked grain he shall obtain heaven; the
4 To the three spheres of light thou goest, Savitar, and with the rays of Sidrya thou combinest thee.
1 O BRAMANASPATI, stand up: God-serving men we pray to thee.
5 Well knowing solemn rites and rich in meath, the fires sing to the morning Asvins at the break of day,
therefore offspring are born sitting; the black antelope skin is above; gold is brilliance, the black
Merely imparting invaluable knowledge to someone is not enough. The recipients of that knowledge must appreciate its value and have faith in its authenticity. Only then will they put in the effort required to implement it practically in their lives. In this verse, Shree Krishna establishes the credibility and importance of the spiritual wisdom he is bestowing on Arjun. Shree Krishna informs Arjun that the knowledge being imparted unto him is not newly created for the convenience of motivating him into battle. It is the same eternal science of Yog that he originally taught to Vivasvan, or Surya, Sun God, who imparted it to Manu, the original progenitor of humankind; Manu in turn taught it to Ikshvaku, first king of the Solar dynasty. This is the descending process of knowledge, where someone who is a perfect authority on the knowledge passes it down to another who wishes to know.In contrast to this is the ascending process of acquiring knowledge, where one endeavors to enhance the frontiers of understanding through self-effort. The ascending process is laborious, imperfect, and time-consuming. For example, if we wish to learn Physics, we could either try to do it by the ascending process, where we speculate about its principles with our own intellect and then reach conclusions, or we could do it by the descending process, where we approach a good teacher of the subject. The ascending process is exceedingly time-consuming, and we may not even be able to complete the inquiry in our lifetime. We can also not be sure about the validity of our conclusions. In comparison, the descending process gives us instant access to the deepest secrets of Physics. If our teacher has perfect knowledge of Physics, then it is very straightforward—simply listen to the science from him and digest what he says. This descending process of receiving knowledge is both easy and faultless.Every year, thousands of self-help books are released in the market, which present the authors’ solutions to the problems encountered in life. These books may be helpful in a limited way, but because they are based upon the ascending process of attaining knowledge, they are imperfect. Every few years, a new theory comes along that overthrows the current ones. This ascending process is unsuitable for knowing the Absolute Truth. Divine knowledge does not need to be created by self-effort. It is the energy of God, and has existed ever since he has existed, just as heat and light are as old as the fire from which they emanate.God and the individual soul are both eternal, and so the science of Yog that unites the soul and God is also eternal. There is no need to speculate and formulate new theories about it. An amazing endorsement of this truism is the Bhagavad Gita itself, which continues to astound people with the sagacity of its perennial wisdom that remains relevant to our daily lives even fifty centuries after it was spoken. Shree Krishna states here that the knowledge of Yog, which he is revealing to Arjun, is eternal and it was passed down in ancient times through the descending process, from Guru to disciple.
the deities, and is not brought low to the deities. 'O divine waters, son of the waters', he says. 'That
Wealth that o'ercometh all mankind, and, near us, conquereth in fight.
2 The food of meath in foremost place I give thee, thy Soma shall be pressed, thy share appointed.
Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libation's place
Those charioteers of' thine, best skilled to draw the rein, the rapid sunbeams, Indra, lead thee not
3. Thou art, bright juice, sustainer of the sky: flow, mighty, in accordance with true law!
May the (draughts) which have stood over night, well offered, come to me;
4 Near kinsman of the heaven and earth is Pusan, liberal, Lord of food, of wondrous iustre,
9. This thine own Soma, rich in meath, O Indra, the Strong, hath flowed into the Strong One's filter.
a To the heart thee! To mind thee! To the sky thee! To the sun thee!
Agni of the front, being delighted with his own portion, burnt in sixteen places the coils of Vrtra; by the
e May she hurt thee not; may she hurt me not.
Singing, at morn may we find thee with favour, yea, Indra, and e'en now, we Bharadvajas.
7 Agni, be thou our Guardian and Protector bestow upon us life and vital vigour.
9 When, Mitra-Varuna, they strive against you and break tlie friendly laws ye have established,
10 Be gracious, Indra, let my days be lengthened: sharpen my thought as 'twere a blade of iron
n Homage to the wholly covered, to the running, to the lord of warriors homage!
6 To this our worship may all Dawns incline them, and come to the pure place like Dadhikravan.
f This is thy portion, O Rudra, with thy sister Ambika; rejoice in it.
7. This amulet which Brihaspati tied that Indra did fasten on, for strength and heroism; that yields him might more
8 Out of a skin, O Rbhus, once ye formed a cow, and brought the mother close unto her calf again.
b To Indra, slayer of Vrtra, thee! To Indra, conqueror of Vrtra, thee! To Indra, slayer of foes, thee! To
He found the cattle, and he found the horses, he found the plants, the forests and the waters.
29 O Agni, by thy wisdom, by thy bounties, by thy leading may I gather wealth.
Rbhus, ye iterate not to-day that act of yours, your sleeping in the house of him whom naught can hide.
Come thou with eight, with ten, to drink the Soma. Here is the juice, brave Warrior: do not scorn it.
1. In might, O Indu, with thy streams flow for the banquet of the Gods:
f To Indra he offers on eleven potsherds, to Savitr on twelve potsherds, to Varuna on ten potsherds.
atmosphere; then the gods prospered [1], the Asuras were defeated. He for whom those are put down
I would support the singer, God who scatterest wealth! and not abandon him to woe.
4 Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, is balmed with oil,
All magic powers thou aidest, self-depen. dent! Auspicious be thy bounty here, O Pusan.
19 Ye who bless sacrifice, go forth, for verily we choose you both,
3. Radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the luminous realm of -heaven.
18 Thus speak these Gods to thee, O son of Ila: As death hath verily got thee for his subject,
2. Hail be, ye wise Mitra and Varuna: with honey swell ye our kingdom here, (so that it shall) abound in offspring!
performed them; the rite of the gods succeeded, that of the Asuras did not succeed. If he is desirous of
people in distress and succours them as they improve; he who knows thus finds support. 'Her too I have
third pressing he should offer to Agni and Visnu on twelve potsherds; Sarasvati should have a share of
4 Thou only sunderest these two consistent worlds, O Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.
The messenger of night with brilliant pathway, like a tree-roosting bird of rapid pinion.
same place, for support. He who knows the possession of the Adhvaryu, becomes possessed (of what he
7. Indra for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds,
vows, I shall perform the vow.' Agni is the lord of vows among the gods; verily after announcement to
It rusheth freely from our hands as these. libations wont to flow.
Longing, they turned their eyes unto the River: to these the Sun of men was manifested.
5 May Soma, ever bringing power to Bhaga and to Vayu, Sage
are two Viraj verses; in that there are two there is support; verily in order he finds support in the Viraj
7. Ye strong gods, favour us in battles, bring into contact with your thunderbolt the Kimîdin! I praise you, O Bhava
Visnu. Visnu accepted it (saying), 'Let Indra place power in us.' By means of the third in the sky Indra
With thine auspicious forms, o Jatavedas, bear this man to the region of the pious.
2. Friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this most resplendent one,
12 Give us fleet coursers to convey Indra and Agni, and bestow
Allied with princes, smiting down the hostile, may we with heroes conquer foes in battle.
4 Voices have sung aloud to thee as finderout of wealth for us:
Wonderful, with your golden paths, most gracious, bringers of the flood. Lovers of sweetness, hear my
3 Do thou, Most Youthful God, protect the men who offer, hear their songs,
Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cast up the gami, that which men were seeking.
13 Listen, All-Gods, to this mine invocation, Ye who inhabit heaven, and air's midregions,
the wives; verily he performs it at the right moment; then indeed comes the conclusion. It is for Tvastr;
Fair are ye, as it were, through splendour of his wealth, his in whose sacrifice, O Stones, ye find delight.
supported; verily he is without support. If he desire of any one, 'May he be without cattle', he should cut
who comes to grief, he seizes hold of him and comes out successfully, and then the one who pointed out
Not stirred to anger, O Wide-Ruler, come to us, come thou to us in every fight.
But Indra smote the rivers which the obstructer stayed, flood following after flood, down steep
1. THE singers welcome with their hymns and praises the Goddess Dawn who bringeth in the sunlight,
1. THEE Agni, God, Imperial Lord of all mankind, do mortal men
2 I know not either warp or woof, I know not the web they weave when moving to the contest.
13 Of ninety rivers and of nine with power to stay the venom's course,The names of all I have secured: his path is far: he whom Bay Horses bear hath turned thee to sweet
make the carts move along with them; verily whatever is his he goes with it to the world of heaven. He
5 Whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, his who is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent,
He gives the hero room who pours oblations, and treasure even to the lowly singer.
1. God’s Laws are excellent and eternal. No one can break or disobey them – neither the conniving
1. WELL knowing I have bound me, horselike, to the pole: I carry that which bears as on and gives us
Fixing the mind upon Shree Krishna is the perfection of sādhanā (spiritual practice), but immediately on beginning the path, we cannot expect to become perfect. So, what should those people do, who cannot perfectly fix their mind on God? Shree Krishna states here that they should endeavor to remember Him with devotion. As the saying goes, “Practice makes perfect.” This is called abhyāsa yog, or “union with God through repeated practice.” Each time the mind wanders toward other objects and ideas, the devotee must strive to bring it back to God through remembrance of His Names, Forms, Virtues, Pastimes, Abodes, and Associates.Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj emphasizes this repeated practice in his instructions for sādhaks:jagata te mana ko haṭā kara, lagā hari meñ pyāreisī kā abhyāsa puni puni, karu nirantara pyāre (Sādhanā Karu Pyāre)“O dear one, remove the mind from the world and fix it on God. Practice this constantly, again and again!”
Take thou another path than this, and as thou listest walk thereon.
Therewith in rapture of the juice, draw near to thy beloved Spouse. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay
1. THY spirit, that went far away to Yama to Vivasvan's Son,
2 Now whither? To what goal of yours go ye in heaven, and not on earth?
1. Of these three earths (our) earth verily is the highest. From the surface of these I have now plucked a remedy.
Strained on the Bow, She whispers like a woman-this Bowstring that preserves us in the combat.
those thee whose portion thou art', he says, for he draws him for those whose portion he is. 'Thou art he
4 Soma, secured by sheltering rules, guarded by hymns in Brhati,
And Indra, with Brhaspati to aid him, conquered the godless tribes that came against him.
11 They have been poured upon the fleece towards the meath-distilling vat:
4.11.4 Sukta 4 – Prana (Life; Breath), personified as the Supreme Spirit
6 The sire of Upamasravas, even him whose words were passing sweet,
m Homage to him of the rain, and to him not of the rain.
Soma said, 'Hurl it not [2]; we are within.' 'Ye are mine', he replied, 'come to me.' They asked for a
8 For these are helps adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune by their name Adityas.
That which is holy oil's mysterious title: but the Gods' tongue is truly Amrta's centre.
c Desired are riches exceedingly for food, for prosperity. Be right to the proclaimers of right. Honour to
Having given a glimpse of His omniscience in the previous verse, Shree Krishna now goes back to a subject He had covered earlier about the dualities in the world. Happiness and distress, pleasure and pain, summer and winter, night and day, etc., all these dualities exist in pairs. These dualities are an inseparable part of life’s experiences. However, the most deluding dualities in life are birth and death. The arena of one’s life exists between the two ends of birth and death. From the very moment a living creature is born, death is inevitable, and again comes a subsequent-birth.Our material intellect believes that worldly pleasures will give us happiness and fulfillment. Therefore, in material consciousness, while we desire the favorable ones, we detest the unpleasant experiences. Although attraction and aversion are not the inherent qualities of these dualities, they develop due to our ignorance. Our intellect does not realize that materially pleasurable situations will only increase our material illusion. Thus, it makes us believe that pain is detrimental to us. However, adversities have the potential of dispelling that material illusion from our mind and elevate our soul. Our ignorance is the root cause of our delusions. A spiritually elevated person accepts these dualities as inseparable aspects of God’s creation and rises above likes and dislikes, attraction and aversion, etc.
The gods and the Asuras were in conflict: the Asuras conquered the gods, the gods being defeated
Hill-haunting God the Goddesses. They bruised him where the roar was loud.
He makes the lights of heaven shine forth secure, he bids, exceeding wise, the floods flow for his
He who knows thus is propagated with offspring, with cattle, with pairings. Indra forcibly drank the
We pray to Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, foremost in sacrificial rites.
powerful, and to Indra of the hymn; in that he offers to Indra, possessed of heat, he thereby makes his
e He puts on dust with a verse addressed to Vaiçvanara; Agni Vaiçvanara is this (earth), the dust is its
2 The Goddesses with Gods, holy with holy, the Two stand pouring out their rain, exhaustless:
3 If to the deft Adhvaryu with the meath in hand, or to the Kindler firm in strength, the household friend,
He mounts his Bays, as the car-seat an archer: yoked at a word they bear the lofty Indra.
the last two; thus they do not burn him up, and for whatever desire they are offered that he obtains by
4. Where grow the asvattha (ficus religiosa) and the banyan-trees, the great trees with crowns, thither do ye, O
6. Life's breath we do drive into thee, disease we do drive away from thee. May this excellent Agni endow us with
2 The chalice that is single make ye into four: thus have the Gods commanded; therefore am I come.
the flashing (lightning), that is born of the cloud, and born of the wind, strike the trees and the mountains!
Ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, Asvins, strengthened with your strength the
1. This Soma hath been pressed for you, Low-strengtheners, Mitra, Varuna!
4. This God as he is flowirig on speeds like a car and gives his aid:
2. O truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than both the worlds.
4. Comfort be to my upper limb, comfort be to my nether; comfort be to my four members, comfort to my entire
1. I WILL declare the mighty deeds of Visnu, of him who measured out the earthly regions,
1. I WORSHIP you who guard this All, Gods, holiest among the Gods,
Craving the milk of heaven the Gods are present: well do they know the praisesong and the Saman.
15 Svitra's mild steer, O Maghavan thou helpest in combat for the land, mid Tugra's houses.
3 Your car is like a torrent rushing downward: may it come nigh, broad-seated, for our welfare,Car holy, strong, that ever would be foremost, thought-swift, which ye, for whom we long, have
2 For him, strong, independent Ruler, Heaven and Earth have fashioned forth for power and might.
the gods conquered, and by means of the new and full moon sacrifices they drove away the Asuras. 'May
That which he knows is truth and never idle: he wins and gives the wealth desired of many.
Brhaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and uttered praise and song when he had found them.
4 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite in thee:
strewing; verily he sets it up in this (earth), and makes it firm-rooted.' 'Support the sky, fill the
to earth thee!' he says; verily he anoints it for these worlds. He anoints from the top downwards;
u The wives of the gods, Agni lord of the house, are the pair of the sacrifice; by sacrifice to these deities,
7 Eager to mingle with the sea, the rivers carry the well-pressed Soma juice to Indra.
Verily by expiration does he make steadfast his inspiration, and he lives all his days. He, who knows the
support, the end of the sacrifice [1] reaches the end with a secure and uninjured sacrifice. 'Do thou
Let us approach thee shining in thy dwelling, kneeling upon our knees, with adoration.
14 As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought vain thoughts about the Gods, O Agni.
fly, it would not be heavenly for him; he puts down the human head towards the east, face upwards [2];
7 So unto us, day after day, may riches craved by many come,
3. As Pavamana thou flowest before the streams: thou goest on, before the hymn, before the kine.
1. When Somas flow thou makest pure, Indra, thy mind that merits laud,
Strength to our seed and progeny that they may live, for thou art he who giveth strength.
supported; in that he puts them down, (it is) for the support of these worlds. Having put down the
their name. In that the various (cups) are drawn, so the sacrificer wins various delights. 'Thou art the
7 The God declares the Deities' generations, like Usana, proclaiming lofty wisdom.
Then, wildly raging in his mind, the archer Krsanu aimed and loosed the string to strike him.
1. LET every mortal man elect the friendship of the guiding God.
All that is firm is frightened at thy coming, -the earth, the heaven, the mountain, and the forest.
cattle for him, and he has cattle. Prajapati created the sacrifice; he first created the butter [5], in the
noise. As men being freed from bonds cry aloud, so the sacrificers freed from the bonds of the gods cry
1. O MUCH-INVOKED, thou hast subdued thy foemen: thy might is loftiest; here display thy bounty.
5 Those, God, who count thee as a worthless bullock, and, wealthy sinners, live on thee the
Bring thou the Gods, O God, unto our worship: serve, well-inclined, as Friend thy friends, O Agni.
Full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go: a thousand bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls.
May Tvastar lengthen our line and kindred, and may they reach the place which Gods inhabit.
Mūḍha grāheṇāt refers to people with confused notions or ideas, who in the name of austerity, heedlessly torture themselves or even injure others without any respect for the teachings of the scriptures or the limits of the body. Such austerities accomplish nothing positive. They are performed in bodily consciousness and only serve to propagate the grossness of the personality.
5 This your deed, Indra-Visnu, must be lauded: widely ye strode in the wild joy of Soma.
18 Agni, bear thou, Eternal, these most welcome oblations to the Deities' assembly:
42 May thy Bay Steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, bring thee to the feast,
Then, Vajas! gained the path of life eternal, deft-handed Rbhus, to the Gods' assembly.
For me, for Indra, champion strong in battle, for me, yourselves, as lovers for a lover.
1. Through the fine fingers, with the song, this hero comes with rapid cars,
5 May our songs bring you hither to our solemn rites: these drops of mighty vigour have they beauti
triple', (with these words) he puts down on the east; the triple is the beginning of the sacrifice [1]; verily
He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were sharpened, stood fettered in the demon's ample region.
support. Yonder sun did not shine. He ran up to Prajapati; he gave him this (rite) of twenty-one nights;
Which Rodasi hath mounted, bringing pleasant gifts, with Maruts in her company.
7 Yea, and this loudly-neighing bright red vigorous horse who hath been sutioned, fair to see,
Ye have sent forth, O Asvins passing mighty, the fire, the sovrans of the wood, the waters,
wins his retinue, he obtains a thousand cattle, in his offspring a strong one is born.
They performed the new moon rite, as the animal sacrifice to Agni. They performed the sacrifice to the
When he was born both Tvastar's worlds were frightened: they turn to him and reverence the Lion.
5 The mighty roaring flood he stayed from flowing, and carried those who swam not safely over.
Subduing all, he keeps his ground and flinches not, from the skilled archer flinches not.
3. As the felloe, and as the spokes, and as the nave (of the wheel is joined) to the felloe, as the heart of the lusty
13 In deep distress I cooked a dog's intestines. Among the Gods I found not one to comfort.
After hearing Shree Krishna’s instructions to behold his form, Arjun wonders where to see it. So Shree Krishna states that it is within the body of the Supreme Divine Personality. There, he will see infinite universes with all their moving and non-moving entities. Every entity exists in the universal form, and so do the events of the past and the future. Arjun will thus be able to see the victory of the Pandavas and the defeat of the Kauravas as an event that is a part of the unfoldment of the cosmic plan for the universe.
2 This Purusa is all that yet hath been and all that is to be;
4 May this my praise preserve Ucathya's offispring: let not these Twain who fly with wings exhaust me.
Then to his task goes the prompt Priest foreknowing the wondrous power of Gods who must be
1. VICTORIOUS in the wood, Friend among men, ever he claims obedience as a King.
again he conquers this world, for this world is repeated as it were again and again. Some vessels are
4 Before the High God, at his birth, heaven trembled, earth, many floods and all the precipices.
2. With stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowed with strength in store
heaven is as it were secret [6]; verily he makes the world of heaven resplendent for him. He sprinkles
1. Upon this (person) the Vasus, Indra, Pûshan, Varuna, Mitra, and Agni, shall bestow goods (vasu)! The Âdityas,
1. The Maruts with their troop adorn and brighten, even at his birth, the Sage, the lovely infant.
7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth of both sides gathered and collected;
Mitra and Varuna were the inviters: Agni as Hota; took her hand and led her.
Bellowing out, the Tawny Steer goes on to Indra's special place.
the sacrificer. He offers the Çatarudriya (oblation); verily he appeases him with his own portion; neither
And strew the grass before the light, have decked themselves with high renown.
3 Even as the Deities maintained Faith in the mighty Asuras,
him who makes many sacrifices. He should repeat indefinitely to win that which is not definite.
southern oblation-holder; verily the sacrificer at the beginning of the sacrifice wins blessings. Now
8 When, Indra, thou whose power is linked with thy Bay Steeds hadst smitten Vrtra, causing floods to
7 Generate songs even as of old, give car unto the singer's call.
2 I yoke thy pair of trusty Steeds for swiftness, whose faithful service from of old thou lovest.
[2], he should put down for him the heads of animals more closely together; his food becomes less; if he
(in the body), moreover as a cure for wounds struck by missiles.
the wealth; the twenty-sevenfold the Stoma, and it forming a path of the thirty-threefold; the draught ox
of heaven. The libation of ghee is the head of the sacrifice, the fire is all the gods; in that he performs the
He, like Parjanya with his rain, hath spread himself with thousand, yea, with myriad gifts.
How then have ancient sages said, O Asvins, that ye most swiftly come to stay affliction?
Naksatras the form, the sun the splendour; to his greatness, to Prajapati, thee (I offer). Hail!
must not leave, to guard himself. The fire here is a tiger to guard the house. Therefore if the man who is
When through our want of thought we violate thy laws, punish us not, O God, for that iniquity.
14. Let us be in peace and harmony with our Earth and with the skies. Let us be in harmony with the waters and
Agni and Visnu; Sarasvati should have a portion of the butter and to Brhaspati an oblation (be offered);
Puru in winning land and slaying foemen, and Trasadasyu son of Purukutsa.
5 On earth the people magnify thee greatly, thee their celestial and terrestrial riches.
Then Indra heard Vasistha as he praised him, and gave the Trtsus ample room and freedom.
3 With whom thou drivest troops whose lords are heroes, and bringest daylight now, much worshipped
Charity in the mode of ignorance is done without consideration of proper place, person, attitude, or time. No beneficial purpose is served by it. For example, if money is offered to an alcoholic, who uses it to get inebriated, and then ends up committing a murder, the murderer will definitely be punished according to the law of karma, but the person who gave the charity will also be culpable for the offence. This is an example of charity in the mode of ignorance that is given to an undeserving person.
2 In all libations men with hero spirit urge the Universal One, each seeking several light, each fain to
Keep far from us the curse of the reviler: bring us accumulated store of treasures.
6. I have interposed heaven and earth, also the day, and also the sun. These divine purohitas (chaplains) shall
indeed will this one fall on misfortune.' He saw this Mantra; 'With the eye of the sun I gaze on thee', he
12 Thou, Varuna, to whom belong Seven Rivers, art a glorious God.
Kind as a friend to men who keep the holy Law.
27. Him that first hurls (the arrow), the other, laying on in defence, slays with the arrow, and while the first deals
22 Ye brought the horse's head, Asvins, and gave it unto Dadhyac the offspring of Atharvan.
them. He takes with an Anustubh; the Anustubh is speech; verily with the whole of speech he takes
p Thou art the string of Indra; thou art the fixed point of Indra.
Now may these wealthy chiefs and we together spread forth as spreads the Sun above the rain-clouds.
8 He issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and found kine hidden somewhere in a stable.
make who desires cattle; the minor deities are the metres, cattle are as it were the metres [1]; verily by
character of the Samidhenis is the quarter-verse which is repeated with the word 'ghee' in it. 'Thee with
7 Like Savitar his arms with might he stretches; awful, he strives grasping the world's two borders.
a Food come hither, enter me for long life, for health, for increase of wealth, for splendour, for good
5 Of whom, the Terrible, they ask, Where is He? or verily they say of him, He is not.
8 I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and all this spacious earth
vessel, for an earthenware one does not hold the offering. It is of Udumbara wood [3]; the Udumbara is
9 Like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in depths, like feet for one who fords a shallow.
3. Pressed out for all to see, delighting Gods, Indu, far-seeing one, is mental power.
14. The sterile cow is as a treasure deposited for die Brâhmanas: they come here for her, with whomsoever she is
As increase of wealth with good heroes, as offspring to us.
1. AGNI, show favour: great art thou who to this pious man art come,
from the same mother they shall suck sap, to exempt this man from injury!
1. O King, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for strength, is
4 Gold-coloured, bannered with the smoke, urged by the wind, aloft to heaven
Now, now must Bhaga be invoked by mortals, Lord of great riches who distributes treasures.
4 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their voices down togetlier, in heaven's vault that pours
Bless us with good minds; Give us healthy bodies, sweet speech, and fair days.
Winners of cattle shali ye be if ye regain for me this man.
4 Men as they worship thee the God, O Agni, have set on thee full many a brilliant, aspect.
4 Agni, like Bhaga, leads the godly people, he who is true to Law and guards the seasons.
on him in yonder world; verily also they are the bodyguards of the sacrificer. He should think of
Dark steeds or ruddy draw his car, or carried in sundry ways he makes them red of colour.
a May I Agni protect me from evil sacrifice, Savitr from evil report.
Three-seated, opulent, bestowing all delight. may it bring weal to us, to cattle and to men.
10 So much, and more exceedingly, O Dawn, it suits thee to bestow,
2 From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was afterwards produced,
a This one in front the existent; his, the existent's breath; spring born of the breath; the Gayatri born of
28 For so thou art the hero's Friend, a Hero, too, art thou, and strong:
to Visnu. Visnu is the sacrifice; verily he unites the sacrifice with the sacrifice. 'The thought divine we
13. The amulet which Brihaspati tied for swift Vâta, wearing that, Savitar through it conquered this light; that yields
Shree Krishna has been explaining how, by performing our duties in the proper consciousness, we can attain perfection. He now describes the excellence that is required for the perfection of Brahman-realization. He says in that state of perfection we develop a purified intellect that is established in transcendental knowledge. The mind is controlled due to not indulging in likes and dislikes. The senses are restrained, and the impulses of the body and speech are tenaciously disciplined. The activities for bodily maintenance, such as eating and sleeping, are wisely held in balance. Such a yogi is deeply contemplative, and hence prefers solitude. The ego and its lust for power and prestige are dissolved. Constantly engaging the mind in transcendence, the yogi is tranquil and free from the bonds of desire, anger, and greed. Such a yogi attains realization of the Absolute Truth as Brahman.
Savitr the fifth; for Rudra the sixth for the serpents the seventh; for Aryaman the eighth; for Tvastr the
And that our men may spread in the encampment, let me complete the rite with these oblations.
Acceptable to Mitra, Vayu, Varuna, he is prepared as threefold meal by skilful men.
Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. may we find strengthening food in full
32 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wedded pair.
12 O Indra, let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee, delightful, golden-visored, on thy car,
6 Lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who roared aloud, six-eyed and triple-headed.
Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prthi, so be ye mindful of us here, O Asvins.
he bestows on him the kingly power, he becomes the kingly power, the kingly power does not fall away
19. Conquered, O foes, do ye flee away; repelled by (our) charm, do ye run! Of yonder host, repulsed by
She hath brought forth Sun, sacrifice, and Agni, and far away hath fled detested darkness.
From heaven hath Pavamana made, as 'twere, the marvellous thunder, and the lofty light of all mankind.
welling forth for thee, for thee the drops are welling forth.
6 May wealth which ye bestow in food and treasure on him who brings you gifts and sacrifices,
27 Be to us, then, ye Gods who merit worship, be ye of one accord our strong protection,
May he, well skilled in rites, be food, and calling Aditi with his lips give us assistance.
Thou gatherest, Thunderer! like widespread bounty, kine, water, drops, and manifold libations.
should say, who has no son born; verily is born to him a son brilliant and resplendent. 'This blessing I
2 He who hath come anear to creatures that have life, Immortal Soma flows onward to all of them.
Grant us abundant food, thou priestly Herald, vouchsafe to give us ample wealth, O Agni.
2 Agni, disclose his thought for him who singeth, the well, Strong God! while thou art praised with
glory of the sacrifice', he should pour (it) down, grasping the Sadas; verily he bestows upon the
23 They sundered Vrtra limb from limb and split the gloomy mountain-clouds,
becomes possessed of cattle [3]. The sun went from this world to yonder world; he having gone to
Drew at the pole the chariot yoked with stallions, joyous, among the hosts of men was noted.
While, pious Stones, they ply their task with piety, and, even before the Hotar, taste the offered food.
4 To him we offer welcomest oblations, the pious bring their strength-inspiring praises.
All fair and lovely treasures-at your glad carouse-thou givest him who offers. Thou art waxing great.
6 To lend free course, O Maruts, to your furious rush, heaven high and higher still gives way,
3 Yea, Heaven and Earth, ye hold in your possession full many a treasure for the liberal giver.
calm for these worlds. 'Let the steed advance, thundering', he says, for he is a steed. 'The sounding, the
6 Come to us hitherward, O Indra, carried by eighty, ninety, or an hundred horses.
with water he grasps the breaths; the breaths are ambrosia, the waters ambrosia; verily he summons the
becomes famous among people [2]. (The rite) is of nine nights; verily in order he places brilliance on
and energetic enough to thwart the attempts of those who are unfriendly and who want to hurt me.
What moves upon a hundred wheels along the female Dragon's path.
The Singer, lauding, calls, for ample riches, the Seven Mighty Ones who bring enjoyment.
23 As holy food, Agni, to thine'invoker give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels.
by it they are propagated. There is an Ekavinça, for support; verily they place radiance in themselves.
In great or lesser fight none checks him, none subdues,-the wielder of the thunderbolt.
9 In battles we invoke Indra still swift to hear, and all the holy Host of Heaven who banish grief,
quick paths of the sacrifice; verily by them do they proceed to the world of heaven. Those who perform
O King, loose, like a thief who feeds the cattle, as from the cord a calf, set free Vasistha.
5 Baffle the foeman's plan, ward off his weapon who would conquer us.
6 The people falter not, nor suffer sorrow, who win themselves this God's terrific spirit.
Hear this, ye excellent as Steers: Atri inviteth you to come.
b Like heavenly light, the heat; hail! Like heavenly light, the Arka hail! Like heavenly light, the bright;
2 Near him thou seemest mightier still in native glory, set to hold
2.2.4.9 Mantra 9: The Explanation of the Mantras in 4. 7
b Thou art taken with a support; to Indra of the Sodaçin thee! This is thy birthplace; to Indra of the
O Mitra and Varuna, ye wise ones with the autumn of the days,
2 From you, benignant Gods, may we gain fully food for sustenance.
with the Adabhya (undeceivable), that is why the Adabhya has its name. He who knows thus deceives
7. Rohita made firm heaven and earth, by him the (heavenly) light was established, by him the firmament. By him
May we be winners of abundant riches. May Indra be our wealth with store of children.
1. Pass by the wrathful offerer; speed the man who pours libation, drink
i To earth hail! To atmosphere hail! To sky hail! To the sun hail! To the moon hail! To the Naksatras
5 When, Mighty One, Lord of the brave, thou thinkest thus, I shall not die,
Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to Brhaspati our hymns have sounded.
Dweller with Dames divine, with plants, unwearied, the Steer with triple horn, the life-bestower.
With us hath Soma with a thousand currents sunk in the wood, upon his Mother's bosom.
5. Let me not, still beseeching thee with might and sound of Soma drops,
that deity, in the manner of Angiras, do thou sit firm,' he says; this is the support of the bricks; he who
3 She, harnessing her car with purple oxen. injuring none, hath brought perpetual riches.
4 Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indu Pavamana lowed,
a Ye are the Nigrabhyas, heard by the gods. Delight my life, delight my expiration, delight my
form of light; verily they place light before them, to reveal the world of heaven. There is a Prsthva
So mayst thou lead us on, O God, to comfort. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
4 Let mortal man adore your God, Agni, with worship due to Gods.
excrements from his head, who accepts (a present) at the twelve-day (rite). Therefore one should not
20 Agni, Disposer, we have sung these praises to thee the Wise: do thou accept them gladly.
priests are the priests, the eager ones, therefore he says thus. 'O Brhaspati, guard wealth' [1], he says;
5 This is to-day the goodliest gift of Savitar: this thought we have when now the God is furthering us.
From verses 3.8 to 3.16, Shree Krishna strongly urged those who have not yet reached the transcendental platform to perform their prescribed duties. In verses 3.17 and 3.18, he stated that the transcendentalist is not obliged to perform prescribed duties. So, what path is more suitable for Arjun? Shree Krishna’s recommendation for him is to be a karm yogi, and not take karm sanyās. He explains the reason for this in verses 3.20 to 3.26.
4 With all the Gods, O Indu Pavamana, while thou art roaring send us wealth in horses.
12 If, when the Sun to the mid-heaven hath mounted, ye take delight in food, O Indra-Agni,
smite away the Raksases; 'with mortal glory, with engaging colour, Agni', he says; verily he bestows
Whom sages laud with hymns as Jatavedas of those who wield the sacrificial ladle.
secure brilliance. 'The golden germ first arose', (with these words) he pours out the butter portion; the
3 With pressing-stones and with the bright beams of the day he hurls his broadest bolt against the
3 The poison that is formed upon the Salmali, that which is found in streams, that which the plants
b Thou art the skin of Aditi, may the earth recognize thee.
Waking to motion every living creature, she understands the voice of each adorer.
3 With lightly-rolling car and well-yoked horses hear this, the press-stone's song, ye Wonder-Workers.
Chapter 2, Decade 1-23 (79 Hymns: 3,3,7,7,4, 3,3,3,3,3, 3,2,3,3,3, 3,2,3,3,3, 3,3,3)
in the sacrifice is the sacrificer' 'The bundle' (is the reply). 'Where in it is the world of heaven?' 'The
1. Now let us publish, for the vigorous company the herald of the Strong One, their primeval might.
this (earth). To him Viçvakarman said, 'Let me come to thee'; 'There is no space here', he answered [3].
2. Do ye eat rice, eat barley, and eat, too, beans, as well as sesamum! That, O teeth.. is the share deposited for
unrestrained; (the son born) of one who drinks from a leaf is drunken; (the son born) of one who drinks
5 In aid of Abhyavartin Cayamana, Indra destroyed the seed of Varasikha.
To these your helpers pour our meath, Immortal Gods, with whom your song of praise hath power to
10 There hath the strong-winged eagle left his talon, as a snared lion leaves the trap that caught him.
The brightly-shining God's three forms he knoweth who first bestowed the sacrificial Guerdon.
5 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to our sacrifice and solemn worship.
10 When singers in their song uplift their voices, some chant the Nivid texts with steady purpose.
He hath found light even in the blinding darkness. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
12 And may he too give car, the Sage, from far away, the Dragon of the Deep, to this our yearning call.
4 The Sire of sacrifice, great God of holy bards, Agni, the measure and the symbol of the priests,
thee that art of Visnu, for the sacrifice to the gods' [1], he says, for he welcomes it for the sacrifice to the
11 Call we on Indra, Maghavan, auspicious, best Hero in the fight where spoil is gathered,
3 Fill thyself full, O Lord of wealth, O Indra, with the juice we shed.
b Homage to you that are in bands, and to you that are destructive homage!
an oblation, to Kuhu an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a pair of cattle. To Agni and Visnu he offers on
3. May our wish, instilled by the gods, be fulfilled by day and night! We go in quest of Arâti. Adoration be to Arâti!
possessed of cattle. He who desires splendour should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra,
spoken, the Stoma sung, the Çastra recited, who art made by the fathers into food to win horses and
libation of ghee, verily the sacrificer at the beginning of the sacrifice wins all the gods. The libation of
With Avatsara's sweet songs will we strive to win the mightiest strength which even he who knows
They have deceived themselves by their own speeches, uttering wicked words against the righteous.
17. To the seasons we speak, to the lords of the seasons, and to the sections of the year; to the halfyears, years,
10 Yea, we will listen to thy words, O singer. With wain and car from far away thou comest.
With promptest aid they come at morn and evening, the worshipper's most blessed guards from
and Varuna; him whom he slays and him who exacts the recompense he delights with their own portion;
1. The juice of Soma thus diffused, sweet to the taste the bright cows drink,
1. May we, with Indra and the Gods to aid us, bring these existing worlds to full completion!
burning. The sacrifice goes away, and turns not back; to him who sacrifices knowing the restoration of
Anustubh has thirty-two syllables, the Anustubh is the support of the metres; (verily thirty-two serve) for
1. Chant we a hymn to Agni while we go to sacrifice, to him
thee, with one-eighth', he would make the Soma not worth a cow, the sacrificer not worth a cow, the
32. Do not drive us from the west, nor from the east; not from the north, and not from the south! Security be thou
3 Where battle's spoil is piled the singer winneth praise, for Indra taketh care of matchless worshippers.
midday pressing; the syllables herein are four, the Tristubh has four Padas, the midday pressing is
thee.' 'In what way wilt thou come to me? ' 'By the regional (bricks)', he replied. He came with the
6 Yoked to thy chariot, led thy tall Bays, Indra, companions of thy banquet, bear thee hither,
3. He hath been hastened to the jars, bountiful, like an eager horse,
1. Because of yore, when the (cloud-) serpent was slain (by Indra), ye did rush forth and shout (anadatâ),
Like Vala he hath passed away and dwelleth now on Gomati.
10 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the cows Brhaspati had taken.
he says; Tutha, all knowing, was wont to allot the gifts of the gods; verily thereby he divides them. 'This
f With Pusan as fellow, from the abode of the earth do thou approach
A sluggish steed men run not with the courser, nor ever lead an ass before a charger.
1.2.10 Mantra 10 – Agni (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
His lustre, joying in its own bright splendour, maketh dear glories in the lowest region.
4 When nigh them, as their tracer he observed them: he called aloud the dear name of Adityas.
Ayus yonder (sky). In that they perform these Stomas, the performers of the Sattra keep finding support
20. Three regions are constructed after the pattern of the Brâhmana: yonder heaven, the earth, and the
Thieves have been seen by us and open foemen: unknown have been the plottings of the wicked.
11 May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by the poet, Mana's
40 In the first vault of heaven loud roared the Ocean, King of all being, generating creatures.
1. The Brâhmana was the first to be born, with ten heads and ten mouths. He was the first to drink the soma; that
flame, the people must observe, tile people that he speed them on.
4 This hath his kinship checked who lives beside us: with ancient streams forth speeds and rules the
is this (earth); verily he stands firm on this (earth). (The Saman) on the second is the Brhat. The Brhat is
Sage who sends wealth comprising every treasure, bringer of many boons, devoid of malice.
son (Pragâpati) begot of yore that which was, and that which shall be.
1 AGNI and Soma, mighty Pair, graciously hearken to my call,
3 I saw the Herdsman, him who never resteth, approaching and departing on his pathways.
the gods, the sap of the waters: may it assiduously enliven me with energy!
impelled by Savitr, he took it with the holy power (Brahman) and with the gods. He was afraid, 'It will
him; and who then will day by day beg of the gods?' Then they say, 'The sacrificer sacrifices for the sake
rite) is of fourteen nights, there are seven domesticated plants and seven wild; (verily it serves) to win
22 May they who lavish gifts bestow those treasures: may Rodasi and Varunani listen.
8 Heart-knower, Sovran of the heart, thou art effused, O Soma, that Indra may drink thee and rejoice.
6 Now let thy strength, thy burning flames fly upward, thine energies, O Agni, as thou toilest.
1.10.59Mantra 59 – Nirrti and Others (Authors: Bandhu, Subandhu, Srutabandhu, Viprabandhu
Blest Silamavati and young Urnavati invest themselves with raiment rich in store of sweets.
first pressing, who hast the Gayatri as thy metre, who art drunk by Indra, who art drunk by Naraçansa,
the divine descendants of the Rishis, assembled about their share (of the porridge), full of fervour, heat this (pot)
1. FOR Ita's sake who pressed the juice, thou, Indra, didst protect his car,
They should consecrate themselves on the full moon in Citra. The full moon in Citra, is the beginning of
then he should say, 'Hither these blessings have come, fain for milking'; verily he milks the deities which
4. We crush the tiger, the foremost of animals, armed with teeth. Next, too, the thief, and then the serpent, the
4 Well-robed, enveloped he is come, the youthful: springing to life his glory waxeth greater.
Him have they stablished as the days' bright ensign. He made the Mornings to be born in splendour.
8 And verily to him who toils and presses Soma juice for thee
Enkindled, sharpened by our rites, may Agni protect us in the day and night from evil.
the others; verily he interlocks him with offspring and cattle. If he desire of a man, 'May he be liable to
that is why the unifying have their name. Then too he puts inspiration upon expiration; therefore
9 Thou, with sleep whelming Cumuri and Dhuni, slewest the Dasyu, keptest safe Dabhiti.
o Guard me, O Agni, from misfortune, place me in good fortune.
m O Agni, utter 'Hail!' O all-knower, over the oblation for Indra;
M Agni, lord of vows, thou art the vow-lord of vows.
May the fortunate one hear us and be aware of us
3 Bonds of the sinner, they bear many nooses: the wicked mortal hardly may escape them.
9 Rich strength of life is yours: ye, Heroes, have obtained through your surpassing powers rich farextending might.
l May thy mother approve thee, thy father, thy brother sprung of the same womb, thy friend in the herd.
Wealth, Gods! which breaks the curse of those who vex us, be, Indra-Varuna, e'en our own
3. 'Even-colour' is the name of thy mother; 'Even-colour' is the name of thy father; thou, O plant, producest even
hold of them in himself, for prosperity [2]. That was the highest victory that the gods won over the
10 High is thy juice's birth: though set in heaven, on earth it hath obtained
3 While thou art cleansed, O Soma, scatter wealth on us; Indu, bestow great bounty as a liberal Prince.
Whence he was born a guest enriched with holy oil, born as Ordainer and as Priest.
12 This priestly task, Gods! Varuna and Mitra! hath been performed for you at sacrifices.
may we win offspring, may we procure offspring, may we possess offspring.' They saw this (rite) of
1 COME, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all the Soma feasts,
With Kanva hast thou blazed, Law-born and waxen strong, thou whom the people reverence.
10 O Maruts, at your voice's sound this earthly habitation shakes,
3 Common, unending is the Sisters' pathway; taught by the Gods, alternately they travel.
9 After the 'way of ancient time, this God, pressed out for Deities,
Thee, wandering round as 't were the sky, who art the invoking Priest of men,
1. O INDRA, for the strength that slays Vrtra and conquers in the fight,
16. They that pierce crosswise, burrow in thy abdomen, without doing injury, without causing disease, they shall
2 Here let the ignorant ask the means of you who know-for none beside you knoweth aught Not of a spiritless mortal man.
With fairest hymns of praise adoring Indra, whom those who laud him must invoke in battle.
17 Come to us, ye who slay the foe, Lords of rich treasure, to this hymn.
connected with Indra and Agni and with Brhaspati', he should say, for Indra and Agni and Brhaspati are
Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, those who are near and those who yet are distant.
4. As this great earth holds the animals scattered far, thus shall thy embryo be held fast, to produce a child after
gift (to the priests). He had intercourse with her. Indra perceived this and reflected, 'He who will be born
consecrated were to leave the consecration-shed, it would be as when a foetus falls from the womb. He
Hither hath run the gold-hued child of Surya, and reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.
b Make thy comrades to swell with wealth and skill; with good fortune
4 Agni bestows all vital power even as each man supplicates.
5 I have departed, still without a portion, wise God! according to thy will, the Mighty.
The lightnings laugh upon the earth beneath them, what time the Maruts scatter forth their fatness.
f Thou art the path of Vayu; thou art the gods' path of Vayu.
serpent as guardian, to the rain as bowman: do ye guard it for us, until we arrive. To the goal here.
with Agni, the prince with Soma; on either side of (the beast) for Soma there is one for Agni; verily with
9 Him whose high law not Varuna nor Indra, not Mitra, Aryaman, nor Rudra breaketh,
what has been swallowed; if he were not to clarify it, it would be as when something falls upon the eye
Prajapati created offspring. They being created were ahungered. He saw this (rite) of nine nights, he
2 At Ayu's ancient call he by his wisdom gave all this progeny of men their being,
i For the might of the ruling class, for a prop, a support, I take thee [2].
23 O Agni, with the cleansing light diffused through all thy fiery glow,
8 Pusan who listens to our prayers, the Strong whose wealth is never lost,
Who, rich in steeds, gave me two dark red horses together with three hundred head of cattle.
Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, which prompts the mighty flow of thine abundance.
1 O WORTHY of oblation, Lord of prospering powers, assume thy robes,
5. The spell which evil-scheming persons have put for thee into the gârhapatya-fire, or into the housefire, that
6. O Rudra, whose remedy is the urine, with black crest of hair, performer of (strong) deeds,overcome thou the
12 Knower of all that lives, O Agni may we both, singers of praise and chiefs, be in thy keeping still.
3. So flow thou on inspiriting, for rapture, turning the weapon of the water's holder!
Guide us, O much-invoked, in this our way: may we still livc and look upon the light!
With the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, come to us: to show us favour come to us.
13 He who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very skilful Agni nigh,
Varuna on ten potsherds, to Sarasvati an oblation, to Agni and Visnu on eleven potsherds; verily he
5 Even to these dark Steeds of Wind thou of thyself hast come to ride,
4 Even thus have they declared him. Famed is Indra as Conqueror, sole distributer of treasures;
The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the Car-horse to the resting places.
Pour on us boldly, Indra, kine and chariot-steeds, ever to be the conqueror's strength!
younger does not overstep the older. He should draw the cup for Indra and Vayu first for one who is ill.
As Kinsman think thou of some fresh assistance; good Friend, give strength and life to those who
7 Forth, for the regions of the Gods, the Charger with his smooth back is come my prayer attends him.
to him. 'Whatever logs we place on thee', (with these words) he puts on a kindling-stick; verily he makes
This Mighty One, the Steer begirt by Maruts, hath propped the heavens up with a mighty pillar.
With power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the Bay Coursers bear him on as Surya.
2. What this black bird has brushed here with thy mouth, O Nirtiti (goddess of misfortune)-may Agni Gârhapatya
3 Young Rudras, demon-slayers, never growing old, they have waxed, even as mountains, irresistible.
The twelve nights' (rite) is Prajapati in twelve divisions. The two sides are the Atiratras, the eight
17 Him sages longing for his aid, with offerings brought in eager haste,
b This one on the right, the all-worker; his, the all-worker's, mind; summer born of mind; the Tristubh
Enlightened souls control the intellect through transcendental knowledge. Then, with the purified intellect, they control the mind, and the mind is used to bridle the senses. However, in the materially conditioned state, the reverse takes place. The senses pull the mind in their direction; the mind overpowers the intellect; and the intellect gets derailed from the direction of true welfare. Thus, Shree Krishna says that if the intellect is purified by spiritual knowledge, then the senses will be restrained; and when senses are held in check, the intellect will not be swayed from the path of divine wisdom.
became (the cup) for the yoker of bays; he reflected regarding it, 'Shall I offer, or shall I not offer?' He
are in me.' The cow brought the (brilliance); therefore they feed off both things that are in the cow; ghee
Indra who knoweth bent his eye upon thee: by him instructed am I come, O Agni.
5 If of a truth in every house, O Mortar thou art set for work,
When ye restored to youth and strength Kaksivan like a car renewed,
all beings thee; whence offspring arose unhurt, for that thee, for Prajapati, of bounteous gifts, full of
Bring us prosperity, and by thy great wisdom, under thine own protection, may we conquer!
That hath so heightened him the great, the wide to do his mighty work. So did the God attend the God, true Indu
Both, wondrously, set them in motion as with arms, in company with Surya's beams.
1. EVEN as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for our bliss,
are fit for the sacrifice, from the chaff! May we in happiness be superior to all our equals! I bend down under our
Young and most skilful, while he holds the region up, the Warrior sprinkles fatness over both his hands.
hast a thousand and seven births, let me announce the origin over the extent of the world!
1. Now send ye Jatavedas forth, send hitherward the vigorous Steed
2 With one accord may Aryaman and Mitra and Varuna this day accept this praise-songAdityas bright and pure as streams of water, free from all guile and falsehood, blameless, perfect.
3. Strong pillar thou, Lord of the home! armour of Soma-offerers!
world; navel deep should he pile (it) when piling for the second time; verily with the Tristubh he mounts
restoration of the sacrifice, and thereby he restores it. Excellence has not been obtained by him who
offered to its own deity; then food came to him. He to whom being fit for food food does not come
As Bhrgu's sons chased Makha, so drive ye the greedy hound away.
2 They who like kindled flames of fire are glowing,. the Maruts, twice and thrice have waxen mighty.
1. Three are the voices that the car-steed utters: he speaks the lore of prayer, the thought of Order.
of Dharma is Truth and Universal Law – it is NOT dogma or blind belief (as is the case with Matas such
1. O Agni, God, the people sing reverent praise to thee for strength:
food. The gods desired, 'May we acquire both the holy power (Brahman) and food! They saw (the rite
2. Who, furthering the light of Law, hath spread himself to meet this work:
With thine assistance, Hero, may we ass through all the waters that are rul`ng down.
Savitar comes, the God from the far distance, and chases from us all distress and sorrow.
5. When Prâna has watered the great earth with rain, then the beasts rejoice; (they think): 'strength, forsooth, we
3 To gain thy mercy, Varuna, with hymns we bind thy heart, as binds
11 The Lord is the savior, the protector, and the almighty whom we joyfully invoke. May He, the
12 To Vayu joined with Pusan, with the Maruts, and the host of Gods,
4. Served with oblation, kindled, bright, through love of song may Agni, bent
Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. May we find strengthening food in full
13 Stand up erect to lend us aid, stand up like Savitar the God:
7 These drops have cried with resonant voice: like swift steeds they have run the course,
5 What mortal understands, O Gods, Indra and Agni, this your way?
of the sacrifice', they replied. Let us choose a boon; let there be drawn a cup for us also herein.' For them
1. MAY they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Fathers who deserve a share of SomaMay they who have attained the life of spirits, gentle and righteous, aid us when we call them.
Lord of the tribes, our Charioteer of riches, Ensign of days, Vaisvanara of mornings.
is impure. In that he girds him in the middle he discriminates between the pure and impure parts. Indra
3 Desiring food he came unto his Mother, and on her breast beheld the pungent Soma.
9 Free for the Maruts is the earth with sloping ways, free for the rushing Ones is heaven with steep
he says; verily he invokes this blessing (on him). If he were to say 'Who hast chosen Agni as Hotr', he
8. Him with ths fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved of all,
In the previous verses, Shree Krishna discussed the constituents of action. Then he described the factors that motivate and control action. Now, he moves on to the goal of action. The ultimate motive behind people’s actions is the search for happiness. Everyone desires to be happy, and through their actions they seek fulfillment, peace, and satisfaction. But since everyone’s actions differ in their constituent factors, the kind of happiness they derive out of their work is also different. Shree Krishna now goes on to explain the three categories of happiness.
Show forth thy strength, compact with straps of leather, and let thy rider win all spoils of battle.
strength and milk. 'Protect my expiration and inspiration; protect my breathing together and crossbreathing', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. 'Thou art imperishable, for imperishableness thee;
3 Though vast and tall, the mountain is affrighted, the height of heaven is shaken at your roaring
4 He who with succour comes to his implorer, the singer here who with his song invites him;
half-verse is this (earth); verily with sap he adorns both. He offers to the quarters; verily with sap he
He goes to war mastering both the mansions: to him both portions of the world are gracious.
17 Wax, O most gladdening Soma, great through all thy rays of light, and be
2 When the priests, strengthening the Son of Holy Law, present their gifts,
His who pours lovely oil as 'twere with yellow drops. Let my songs enter thee whose form hath golden
2. Then was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, and song of joy.
2 The heavenly Waters come not nigh the priestly bowl: they but look down and see how far mid-air is
bespeak for the takman, or these regions here other (than ours).
5 As the sage Atri with his hymns, O Asvins, called you eagerly,
3. He did not, forsooth, call thy name, and thou shalt not delight in this' husband! To the very farthest distance do
5 These lightly kindled fiery flames are all around made visible,
They hasten with swift steeds easy to be controlled. Their cars moved onward as they went to victory.
7 True with the True and Mighty with the Mighty, with Gods a Goddess, Holy with the Holy,
2 Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant food which thou hast had aforetime,
3 No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens evermore:
2.6.11.8 Mantra 8: The Specialities of the Samans of the Mahavrata
4 The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is destined, flow,
Through whom our sires, Angirases, singing praises and knowing well the places, found the cattle.
Let him as Guardian be invoked in all the tribes, the lighter-up of glowing brands.
These offerings are for you, these, Maruts, I present. Go not to any place but this.
for atonement. He cuts from the sides, for men cut from the middle; be cuts crossways, for men cut
Austerity of speech is speaking words that are truthful, unoffending, pleasing, and beneficial for the listener. The practice of the recitation of Vedic mantras is also included in the austerities of speech. The progenitor, Manu, wrote:satyaṁ brūyāt priyaṁ brūyān na brūyāt satyam apriyampriyaṁ cha nānṛitaṁ brūyādeṣha dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ(Manu Smṛiti 4.138)[v4]“Speak the truth in such a way that it is pleasing to others. Do not speak the truth in a manner injurious to others. Never speak untruth, though it may be pleasant. This is the eternal path of morality and dharma.”
Lord of men, armed with thunder, with the Strongest, slaying his foes in conflict, in the battles.
13 This is your chariot, Asvins, which speeds through the regions, earth and heaven
sacrifices, and the gods delight in his sacrifice. This is the taking of the sacrifice and so after taking the
7 As friend to aid a friend, Agni dressed quickly three hundred buffaloes, even as he willed it.
4 Three several words are uttered: kine are ]owing, cows who give their milk:
Granting the lord of the sacrifice a share in increase of wealth,
7 Quickly, O Agni, hear us: magnified by us thou shalt speck for us to the Gods adorable yea, to the
The foes she chaseth like a valiant archer, like a swift warrior she repelleth darkness.
5 May strength preserve the compass of thy vigour, God! that broad stream of thine that beareth riches.
5. Hither to thee Rohita has brought sovereignty; he has dispersed the enemies: freedom from danger has
support. 'Thou art the back of the waters', (with these words) he takes the lotus leaf [1]; the lotus leaf is
12 Surya transgresses not the ordered limits set daily by the Lord of Tawny Coursers.
9 Indra consumeth with the rays of Surya the malicious man:
water; may the pot receive you! When ye have cookect this (porridge) go ye to the world of the pious (heaven)!
22 When did the son of' Tugra serve you, Men? Abandoned in the sea,
3. Him with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved of all.
For all the gods is the fire piled up; if he were not to put (them) down in unison, the gods would divert
Bright were both Steers that drew it when Surya approached her husband's, home.
sciences; verily he enkindles it with the sciences. 'May the wives thee', he says; the wives are the metres;
4 I gladly, men I with prayer prayed by our fathers have fixed your axle: ye shall not be injured:
2.4.3.6 Mantra 6: The Naturally Perforated and other Bricks of the Third Layer
16 Call we for you that Indra, prompt to listen, him who hath done so much for men's advantage;
Who ride impetuous on with rapid horses, and radiant in themselves, are Lords of Amrta.
purify myself, that may I have strength to accomplish.' Verily does he invoke this blessing.
Viçvamitra and Jamadagni had a feud with Vasistha; Jamadagni saw these Vihavya (bricks); he put
verily he brings cattle on birth to his own dwelling. This (earth) was afraid of excessive burning by the
19 As great as is the fair-winged Morning's presence to him who dwells beside us, matarisvan!
3. Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams the ocean flows.
1. MAY benediction of the Gods approach us, holy, to aid us with all rapid succours.
24 Cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, O Agni, that is bright with flame,
8 The offercr whom thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, liberal Maghavan, favourest,As at the call of Kanva so, O gracious Lord, hear, thou our songs and eulogy.
birds; if he were to pile it face downward, the libations would reach it behind; if upwards, it could not
They, following the wind's swift course go where the Gods have gone before.
9 O blameless Agni lying in thy Parents' lap, a God among the Gods, be watchful for our good.
what is dug in has the Pitrs for its deity.' If he were to set it up without strewing, it would be dug in and
15 May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by the poet, Mana's son, Mandarya,
14 I glorify with song, for wealth, Agni the God, the first of you.
5. Come, priest, and of the savoury juice pour forth a yet more gladdening draught:
Illumining the nights, the Sun's creator, like Dhisana he deals forth strength and riches.
4 O Asvins, let your falcons bear you hither, yoked to your chariot, swift, with flying pinions,
For gain of children make us thine, O Indra, of many children's children and of cattle.
6 Which among these is eldest, and where is she through whom they fixed the Rbhus' regulations?
Like as the countess undulations of the floods, worthy of praise when near, like bullocks and like kine.
for six days, thereby they created three hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne for six
Whose steeds are spotted deer, whose riches never fail, like horses in full speed, bound to the pole in
h May the bull, wide extending, afford us protection rich in food,
(with them) those that last double the time; the sixteenfold stotra (shodasin), and the soma-sacrifice that lasts
10 He comes by straightest paths, as ministering Priest, to taste the sacrificial gifts.
21 If ye to-day at sunrise, or at noon, or in the gloom of eve,
4 Thou smotest Vrtra from the earth, smotest him, Indra, from the sky.
15 Guides are ye, lovers of the song to mortal man through holy hymn,
When wilt thou yoke, as we yoke songs, thy Horses, and come to offerings that bring wealth in cattle?
4 None other is there for the priest, Hero! but thou, to give him gifts,
We clothe the hue thou wearest with a robe of milk.
May he hear kindly all our invocations who gives all bliss for aid, whose works are righteous.
Thou to the man who- prays and pours the juice hast been best giver of delightful wealth.
1 As a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of fair deeds,
whom this arrangement is made, and he too who knows it thus. He puts down the creating (bricks);
15 Then he was my Defender, then, Invincible, whose foe is not,
41 Thou art a Rsi born of old, sole Ruler over all by might:
1. MY thought with fine discernment hath discovered the Cow who wanders free without a herdsman,
3 O Darter of the Stone, the powers which readily obey thy will,Divinities, both thou and they, ye rule, to guard them, earth and heaven.
Then-at your glad carouse-let men joy in thy love, sweet juice! as kine in pasturage. Thou waxest great,
Ye Strong, give sway to him who brings oblation and with his heart pours out his gift before you.
4 Indra with might shook earth and her foundation as the wind stirs the water with its fury.
9 The golden-handed Savitar, far-seeing, goes on his way between the earth and heaven,
with two (verses), for support. 'As measurer, he standeth in the midst of the sky', he says; verily with this
1. MAY your gold chariot, drawn by vigorous horses, come to us, blocking up the earth
b By the bow cows, by the bow the contest may we win,
the Vasus are the beginning of the sacrifice, the Rudras are the beginning of the sacrifice, the twentyAno Bhadraha Kritavayo Yantu Vishwataha (Let noble thoughts come from every side) – Rg Veda
5 Hear what thou mayst hear, thou who, fain for worship, as heaven girds earth, guardest thy servant's
A mother never thinks of deserting her newborn helpless child who is entirely dependent upon her. The supreme and eternal mother of the soul is God. In this verse, God offers motherly assurance to souls who surrender exclusively to Him. The words used are vahāmi aham, meaning “I personally carry the burden of maintaining My devotees,” just as a married man carries the burden of maintaining his wife and children. God promises two things. The first is yog—He bestows His devotees the spiritual assets they do not possess. The second is kṣhem—He protects the spiritual assets that His devotees already possess.However, the condition He has placed for this is exclusive surrender. This can again be understood through the same analogy of the mother and child. A newborn baby is fully dependent upon its mother, who takes care of the baby’s welfare entirely. The baby simply cries whenever it needs anything; the mother cleans it, feeds it, bathes it, etc. But when the baby becomes a five-year old child, it begins doing some actions for itself. To that extent the mother reduces her responsibilities. And when the same child becomes a youth and assumes all responsibilities, the mother relinquishes her responsibilities further. Now if the father comes home and asks, “Where is our son?” the mother replies, “He has not returned home after school. He must have gone for a movie with his friends.” Her attitude is now more neutral toward him. But when the same boy was a five-year old, and had gotten delayed by ten minutes in returning home from school, both the mother and father would begin worrying, “What has happened? He is a small child. Let’s hope he has not met with an accident. Let us phone the school and find out.”In this way, as the boy keeps assuming more responsibilities, his mother keeps relinquishing her responsibilities. God’s law is exactly the same. When we act from our independent will, thinking that we are the doers of our actions, and depend upon our own prowess and abilities, God does not bestow His grace. He merely notes our karmas and gives the result. When we surrender partially to Him and partially depend upon material crutches, God also partially bestows His grace upon us. And when we offer ourselves exclusively to Him, māmekaṁ śharaṇaṁ vraja, God bestows His complete grace and takes full responsibility, by preserving what we have and providing what we lack.
3 Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meath: they make a humming sound over the
Gâtavedas Vaisvânara (the fire common to all men) guard thee! Let not the heavenly (fire) together with the
goes to the world of heaven. He lets her go towards the sacrificer. Quickly a thousand springs up. The
27. As long as the owner does not himself hear the stanzas referring to (the giving away of) her, she may herd
Thy might, O Indra, fain to slay the Dragon, was set firm in heaven, lauding thine own imperial sway.
the castles of the Dasyus. With it those that hate me do thou slay!
With brilliant rays of hymns let chanted praises, repeated with the lauds, adorn and deck you.
Even thus flow onward now conferring riches: combine with Indra, and bring forth thy weapons.
The milk, the hymns unite them with him in the place of sacrifice, his seat who is produced anew.
3 Praise him, ye Aryan folk, as chief performer of sacrifice adored and ever toiling,
Anustubh has thirty-two syllables, Prajapati is connected with the Anustubh-gaining Prajapati by his
7 Raw kine thou filledst with ripe milk. Thou madest Surya rise to heaven.,
Dear let him be to Surya, dear to Agni, preeminent with son and children's children.
As Lord in homes of men is Agni stablished, the Holy One, the joyous, sweetly speaking.
Poured for the guerdon-giving man, poured for the God who sitteth there.
it with its own portion, and the cruel fire [1] does not spring up in wrath and injure his offspring and
7 Through these the Thunderer gained strong manly vigour, through whom he waxed in power to smite
should give four cows; verily with them the sacrificer in yonder world milks the fire.
34 What time her husband's perfect restoration to his lost strength and manhood was apparent,
13 O Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again to mind this our relationship?
13. Indu, to us for this great rite, bearing as 'twere thy wave to Gods, unwearied, thou art flowing on.
In this verse, adhiṣhṭhānam means “place of residence,” and refers to the body, since karmas can only be performed when the soul is situated in the body. Kartā means “the doer,” and refers to the soul. Although the soul itself does not perform actions, it inspires the body-mind-intellect mechanism with the life force to act. Further, it identifies with their actions, due to the influence of the ego. Therefore, it is responsible for the actions performed by the body, and it is called both the knower and the doer. The Praśhna Upaniṣhad states: eṣha hi draṣhṭā spraṣhṭā śhrotā ghrātā rasayitā mantā boddhā kartā vijñānātmā puruṣhaḥ sa pare ’kṣhara ātmani saṁpratiṣhṭhate (4.9)[v3] “It is the soul that sees, touches, hears, feels, tastes, thinks, and comprehends. Thus, the soul is to be considered both—the knower and the doer of actions.” The Brahma Sūtra also states: jño ‘ta eva (2.3.18)[v4] “It is truly the soul that is the knower.” Again, the Brahma Sūtra states: kartā śhāstrārthavattvāt (2.3.33)[v5] “The soul is the doer of actions, and this is confirmed by the scriptures.” From the above quotations, it is clear that the soul is also a factor in accomplishing actions.The senses are instruments used for performing actions. Without the senses, the soul could not have experienced the sensations of taste, touch, sight, smell, or sound. There are also the five working senses—hands, legs, voice, genitals, and anus. It is with their help that the soul accomplishes various kinds of work. Thus, the senses are also listed as factors in accomplishing actions.Despite all the instruments of action, if one does not put in effort, nothing is ever done. In fact, effort is so important that Chanakya Pandit states in his Neeti Sūtras: utsāhavatāṁ śhatravopi vaśhībhavanti [v6] “With sufficient effort, even poor destiny can be transformed into good fortune.” Nirutvāhād daivaṁ patita [v7] “Without proper effort, even good destiny can be converted into misfortune.” Therefore, cheṣhṭhā (effort) is another ingredient of action.God is seated within the body of the living being as the witness. Based upon their past karmas, he also bestows different abilities to different people to perform actions. One may call this Divine Providence. For example, some people possess the acumen for earning huge amounts of wealth. Their acquaintances become astonished by their brilliant financial analysis of complex situations. They also seem to be lucky with the risks they take. This special intellect is granted to them by God. Similarly, others seem to have God-given talents in fields such as sports, music, art, literature, etc. It is God who bestows people these special abilities, in accordance with their past karmas. He also grants the results of the present karmas. Hence, he is listed as one of the factors responsible for action.
who desires splendour he should offer dewlapped (beasts) [4], to Agni one with a black neck, to Indra
Thou, Indra, praised by Divodasa's clansmen, as heaven grows great with days, shalt wax in glory.
Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise and worship, Priest for ever.
that will I bestow on thee'; he bestowed on him again the Ukthya. Him when he had lost his magic
6 Let your swift-gliding coursers bear you hitherward with their fleet pinions. Come ye forward with your
those that debate against us, render them devoid of force, O plant!
When, Strong, with might thou holpest Divodasa who poured libations out, O Soma-buyer, and madest
More skilled than man to guide us,-at your glad carouse-save us from harm and sorrow. Thou art
1. Pressers, blend Soma juice for him, each draugbt most excellent, for him
26. Joys, pleasures, delights, jubilation and merriment, all gods in the heavens, founded upon heaven, were born
4 In thy mysterious place, O Pavamana Soma, are all the Gods, the Thrice-Eleven.
Ye are the stable by name; your houses are in the north; your arrows are the waters; the sea, &c.
20. The gods did ask for the sterile cow, making the Brâhmana their mouthpiece. The man that does not give
24. Do thou win here, do thou conquer here, overcome, win, hail! These here shall conquer, those yonder be
firm (plants) that bear a thousand names, the healing (plants), shall be brought hither!
Kine numbering sixty thousand followed after. Kaksivan gained them when the days were closing.
10 May thine assistance keep us safe, thy hundred and thy thousand aids:
unploughed, (it serves to prevent) her being excessively burned. 'He should restrain Agni when twofold',
f Homage to the dart of Bhava, to the lord of the moving world homage!
Grant to our princes excellent protection, may they wax old and still be strong and happy.
These Two with their support uphold both Gods and men, and with the Fathers pour the copious genial
Those who prepare the cooking-vessels for the Steed,-may the approving help of these promote our
b 'Agni we choose as envoy', he says; verily having called he chooses him.
We have gone forth for dancing and for laughter, tofurther times prolonging our existence.
1. Harness, O Agni, O thou God, thy steeds which are most excellent!
13 I stay the earth from thee, while over thee I place this piece of earth. May I be free from injury.
Sages whose tongue is Agni, brilliant as the Sun,-hither let all the Gods for our protection come.
Vrtra [3] slain grasped with sixteen coils; he saw this libation to Agni of the front; he offered it, and
These things did Indra in the joy of the Soma [5].
Here let the Fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, and there let Yama make thee an abiding-place.
Or who give guerdon thousandfold, -even to those let him depart.
Thou goest with red winds: bliss hast thou in thine home. As Pusan thou thyself protectest worshippers.
1. JOY, Mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung most from Soma-draughts, wherewith
9 Rbhus, who helped their Parents and the Asvins, who formed the Milch-cow and the pair of horses,
is milk, the Samnayya is milk; verily with milk he places milk in himself. The moon deprives him of
7. Pressed for the gladdening draught the drops flow forth abundantly with song,
offspring; wide room is cattle; verily he bestows on himself offspring and cattle. Indra slew Vrtra; him
Hearkening to us with help do thou sit on thy place.
9. Come now and let us glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymn!
And, by refulgent light, heaven and the waters. The Gods possessed the wealth. bestowing Agni.
As God, the secret names of Gods he utters, to be declared on sacred grass more widely.
the sacrifice comes to him. It is a dwarf (beast), for it has Visnu for its deity; (verily it serves) for
2 The will and thoughts within my breast exert their power: they yearn with love, and fly to all the
5 Him, green, beloved, many eyed, the Sisters with prosing stones
n These are thine overlords, to them honour, be they gracious to us, him whom we hate and who hateth
Who will this day declare to us how the funeral gift was made?
not totter upon the altar, when thou art pressed by the tools of sacrifice and the ghee!
5. From thy thighs, knees, heels, and the tips of thy feet--from thy hips I do tear out the disease seated in thy
Therewith do thou tear up and rend to shreds the heart of every one.
3 The Two who show their vigour, Night and Morning, by the wind's paths shall haste to thee O Agni.
a Thou art a bay, yoker of bays, mounter on the bays, bearer of the bolt, lover of Prçni; to thee, O god
23. He who rules over this (all) derived from every source, and over everything that movesreverence be to thee, O
12 May Rudra and Sarasvati, accordant, Visnu and Vayu, pour down gifts and bless us;
To the Gods, verily, he gives rich treasure, and blesses him who calls them to the banquet.
penance Jamadagni beheld it, and by it he created various delights; that is why the various (cups) have
Obtain most liberal aid for their salvation, and praise thee, Indra, through thine excellencies.
1. The rising sun shall slay the worms, the setting sun with his rays shall slay the worms that are within the cattle!
14 So, Indra, form us brilliant holy singers for strength, for glory, and for food and riches.
Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path which leads to sleep. Supreme is Indra over all.
4 Bring, Indra, to the east again that Sun who now is in the west,
f Then to the father, with the All-gods, to the strong one,
4 We seek to win thy friendly love, even Pavamana's flowing o'er
Dust lies upon the way of him who burneth all, black-winged and pure of birth who follows sundry paths.
2 O Lord of this dwelling! Be our protector and preserver. Augment our wealth. May we, through your
the twenty-twofold', (with these words he puts down) on the west; in that there are twenty, thereby there
restrainer; for inspiration thee! Quicken inspiration. Thou art the glider; for the eye thee! Quicken the
strength, from his eyes, from his ears, from his trunk, from the members, from life; swiftly he comes to
and Omnipresent Lord. Those immature people who live in sloth do not receive your blessing.
q Homage to him of the dwelling, and to him who guardeth the dwelling.
8 He who in waters with his own pure Godhead shines widely, law-abiding, everlastingThe other worlds are verily his branches, and plants are born of him with all their offspring.
power on the sacrificer [2]. In front of that for Indra he offers that for the All-gods; food is connected
The waters feed with praise the growing Babe, born nobly in the womb, the seat of Law.
himself for the sacrifice waxes great. Having purified him without he makes him go within. Verily
8 With castles hundredfold, O Maruts, guard ye well the man whom ye have loved from ruin and from
7. Hero, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink
Do thou with all, with Rtu, O thou Excellent, fain, make the great Gods all fain taste the gift we bring.
immortality; it is of a hundred (Krsnalas) in weight, man has a hundred (years of) life, a hundred
speech full of honey for the gods, and acceptable to men.
10 So are his lovely gifts; let lauds and praises be to Indra sung,
In the Vedic tradition, food is cooked with the consciousness that the meal is for the pleasure of God. A portion of the food items is then put in a plate and a verbal or mental prayer is made for the Lord to come and eat it. After the offering, the food in the plate is considered prasād (grace of God). All the food in the plate and the pots is then accepted as God’s grace and eaten in that consciousness. Other religious traditions follow similar customs. Christianity has the sacrament of the Eucharist, where bread and wine are consecrated and then partaken. Shree Krishna states in this verse that eating prasād (food that is first offered as sacrifice to God) releases one from sin, while those who eat food without offering commit sin.The question may arise whether we can offer non-vegetarian items to God and then accept the remnants as his prasād. The answer to this question is that the Vedas prescribe a vegetarian diet for humans, which includes grains, pulses and beans, vegetables, fruits, dairy products, etc. Apart from the Vedic culture, many spiritually evolved souls in the history of all cultures around the world also rejected a non-vegetarian diet that makes the stomach a graveyard for animals. Even though many of them were born in meat-eating families, they gravitated to a vegetarian lifestyle as they advanced on the path of spirituality. Here are quotations from some famous thinkers and personalities advocating vegetarianism:“To avoid causing terror to living beings, let the disciple refrain from eating meat… the food of the wise is that which is consumed by the sādhus; it does not consist of meat.” The Buddha.“If you declare that you are naturally designed for such a diet, then first kill for yourself what you want to eat. Do it, however, only through your own resources, unaided by cleaver or cudgel or any kind of ax.” The Roman Plutarch, in the essay, “On Eating Flesh.”“As long as men massacre animals, they will kill each other. Indeed, he who sows the seeds of murder and pain cannot reap joy and love.” Pythagoras“Truly man is the king of beasts, for his brutality exceeds them. We live by the death of others. We are burial places! I have since an early age abjured the use of meat…” Leonardo da Vinci.“Nonviolence leads to the highest ethics, which is the goal of all evolution. Until we stop harming all living beings, we are all savages.” Thomas Edison.“Flesh-eating is simply immoral, as it involves the performance of an act which is contrary to moral feeling—killing.”  Leo Tolstoy.“It may indeed be doubted whether butchers’ meat is anywhere a necessary of life… Decency nowhere requires that any man should eat butchers’ meat.” Adam Smith.“I look my age. It is the other people who look older than they are. What can you expect from people who eat corpses?” George Bernard Shaw.“A dead cow or sheep lying in a pasture is recognized as carrion. The same sort of carcass dressed and hung up in a butcher’s stall passes as food!” J. H. Kellogg.“It is my view that the vegetarian manner of living, by its purely physical effect on the human temperament, would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind.” Albert Einstein“I do feel that spiritual progress does demand at some stage that we should cease to kill our fellow creatures for the satisfaction of our bodily wants.” Mahatma GandhiIn this verse, Shree Krishna goes further and says that even vegetation contains life, and if we eat it for our own sense enjoyment, we get bound in the karmic reactions of destroying life. The word used in the verse is ātma-kāraṇāt, meaning “for one’s individual pleasure.” However, if we eat food as remnants of yajña offered to God then the consciousness changes. We then look upon our body as the property of God, which has been put under our care for his service. And we partake of permitted food, as his grace, with the intention that it will nourish the body. In this sentiment, the entire process is consecrated to the Divine. Bharat Muni states:vasusato kratu dakṣhau kāla kāmau dṛitiḥ kuruḥpururavā madravāśhcha viśhwadevāḥ prakīrtitāḥ [v8]“Violence is caused unknowingly to living entities in the process of cooking, by the use of the pestle, fire, grinding instruments, water pot, and broom. Those who cook food for themselves become implicated in the sin. But yajña nullifies the sinful reactions.”
fee, the self, offspring; therefore should it be piled with five layers; verily he preserves all. In that there
among the gods, the larger among the Asuras; the gods recited the larger metre with the smaller on
10 Drive forward thou the wagon-ox, O Indra, which brought Usinarani's wagon hither.
5 The Soma-stalk hath roared, following with the wave: he swells with sap for man the skin which Gods
2 Thou hast a car more swift than thought, O Indra; thercon come hither, come to drink the Soma.
Best leaders, best deliverers to lead us on and bear as safe beyond our foes.
To Prajapati hail! To Ka hail! To Who hail!' To Whoever (katamásmai) hail!
7 On the world's summit I bring forth the Father: my home is in the waters, in the ocean.
verily he makes it at home. 'Thy libation is bright', he says; for bright is its libation. He advances (for it)
e This above, bringing riches; the leaders of his host and bands Tarksya and Aristamemi, and Urvaçi and
the lowest of the deities, Visnu the highest; in that he offers to Agni and Visnu on eleven potsherds, the
he puts down; the gods are three and thirty; verily he wins the gods; verily also he piles up the fire with
In these two verses, Lord Krishna continues to confirm his Supreme Lordship and absolute dominion over all that exists in creation. Here, he mentions twenty emotions that manifest in a variety of degrees and combinations in different people to form the individual fabric of human nature. He declares that the various moods, temperaments, and dispositions of humankind all emanate from him.Buddhi is the ability to analyze things in their proper perspective.Jñānam is the ability to discriminate spiritual from material.Asammoham is the absence of confusion.Kṣhamā is the ability to forgive those who have harmed us.Satyam is the veracity to declare the truth for the benefit of all.Dam means restraining the senses from the sense objects.Śham is restraint and control of the mind.Sukham is the emotion of joy and delight.Duḥkham is the emotion of sorrow and affliction.Bhavaḥ is the perception of one’s existence “I am.”Abhāvaḥ is the experience of death.Bhaya is the fear of oncoming difficulties.Abhaya is freedom from fear.Ahinsā is abstinence from harming any being through word, deed, or thought.Samatā is equanimity in good and bad situations.Tuṣhṭi is feeling content in whatever comes by ones karma.Tapa is voluntary austerities for spiritual benefit, in accordance with the Vedas.Dān is giving in charity to one who is worthy.Yaśh is fame arising from possessing good qualities.Ayaśh is infamy for possessing bad qualities.Shree Krishna states that all these qualities manifest in individuals to the extent sanctioned by him alone. Hence, he is the source of all good and bad natures in living beings. This can be likened to the electric power supplied by the power house being used by various gadgets. The same electric power passing through different gadgets creates different effects. It creates sound in one, light in the other, and heat in the third. Although the manifestations are different, their source is the same electric supply from the powerhouse. Similarly, the energy of God manifests in us positively or negatively according to our puruṣhārth (the actions we perform by exercising our freedom of choice) in the present and past lives.
was afraid [6], 'It will harm me when I have eaten.' 'With the belly of the Brahman', he said, for nothing
1. How did the Earth and the sky come into being? In what order were the various components of the
18. Come, ye gods, from the south and the west; ye gods in the east come forth! From the east, from the north the
4.3.4 Sukta 4 – Prayer at the Election of a King
6 Urged onward by the sage, the God speeds forward to the casks of wood,
dappled (deer) to day; the black (antelope) to night; the cuckoo, the Ksvinka, the black-headed, these are
With reins easily guided and commanding all. In the deep fall the hide stealeth away their names.
4. Thou (serpent) here, crooked, without joints, and without limbs, that twisteth thy crooked jawsmayest thou, O
3. May he with might unclose for us the cow's stall, whosesoe'er it be,
10 When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vak, Queen of Gods, the Gladdener, was
makes him attain the world of heaven; he should throw (the leaf) down in the path of the cattle of him
2. Give life to him, O Gâtavedas, bestow in addition progeny upon him, O Tvashtar; procure, O Savitar, increase
thousand; in the middle he puts down the head of the man, to give it strength. In the pan he puts (it)
1. Headache and suffering in the head, pain in the ears and flow of blood, every disease of the head, do we
2. As the eagle when he flies forth presses his wings against the earth, thus do I fasten down thy mind, so that
All the elements of nature are integral parts of the system of God’s creation. All the parts of the system naturally draw from and give back to the whole. The sun lends stability to the earth and provides heat and light necessary for life to exist. Earth creates food from its soil for our nourishment and also holds essential minerals in its womb for a civilized lifestyle. The air moves the life force in our body and enables transmission of sound energy. We humans too are an integral part of the entire system of God’s creation. The air that we breathe, the Earth that we walk upon, the water that we drink, and the light that illumines our day, are all gifts of creation to us. While we partake of these gifts to sustain our lives, we also have our duties toward the integral system. Shree Krishna says that we are obligated to participate with the creative force of nature by performing our prescribed duties in the service of God. That is the yajña he expects from us.Consider the example of a hand. It is an integral part of the body. It receives its nourishment—blood, oxygen, nutrients, etc.—from the body, and in turn, it performs necessary functions for the body. If the hand looks on this service as burdensome, and decides to get severed from the body, it cannot sustain itself for even a few minutes. It is in the performance of its yajña toward the body that the self-interest of the hand is also fulfilled. Similarly, we individual souls are tiny parts of the Supreme Soul and we all have our role to play in the grand scheme of things. When we perform our yajña toward him, our self-interest is naturally satiated.Generally, the term yajña refers to fire sacrifice. In the Bhagavad Gita, yajña includes all the prescribed actions laid down in the scriptures, when they are done as an offering to the Supreme.
heaven. Indra and Agni are the bearers of force among the gods; in that (the cup) for Indra and Agni is
3 Victorious with the men, Hero in battles, Indra, who hearsthe singer's supplication,
to you.' 'In what way will ye come?' 'By greatness', they replied. To them they came with two (more)
wealth. Let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of our weak enemies!
Vayu was the animal; with it they sacrificed; it won this world where Vayu is; this is thy world,
1. For Jatavedas, worthy of our praise, will we frame with our mind this eulogy as 'twere a car.
2 Let not man's guile annoy us, secret or by day: give not us up a prey to these calamities.
Having kept the fire in the pan for a year in the second year he should offer on eight potsherds to Agni,
h The supreme ruler, the overlord, death is the Gandharva; his Apsarases are the whole (world), (called)
1. Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their lauds,
Ye Twain, together, Kings of willing spirit, uphold dominion based on thousand pillars.
To us he bore a son, and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to us-ward.
The teacher by (his own) brahmakâryam (holy life) seeks (finds) the Brahmakârin.
4 They have bestowed of Mitra all that live, to feed, they who for evermore cause their swift drops to
So that no thief, no sinner may oppress us. Loud may we speak, with heroes, in assembly.
with its body; extending more broadly, make the sacrifice of the lord of the sacrifice most successful.
7. Deft-handed! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea. Thou, Pavamana, makest riches flow to us,
Thou Indra, hast spread out the earths high ridges, and firmly fixed the region under heaven.
middle it should be poured down', they say, for the middle one enjoys life; 'In the latter part it should be
d Let the god Savitr set thee free for life, for living, with the Pavamana Stoma, with the path of the
2 The richly-coloured Dawns have mounted eastward, like pillars planted at our sacrifices,
9 Save us, O Maruts, Vasus, from the injurer, the mortal foe who makes us looked upon as wolves.
Come to us, Kings who reach to heaven, approach us, coming hitherward.
11 This speaker, Indra-for thou art our Friend-wherever he may be, guard thou, Victor! for help, ever for
reached the supreme goal. He who [2] knowing thus offers the new and full moon sacrifices reaches the
Drives away sickness, bids the Sun approach us, and spreads the bright sky through the darksome
Bring hithier, O thou God, all Gods together: provide them noble worship, Jatavedas.
6 Our herds thou guardest, Soma, and the moving world spread far and wide.
Is he not better than the Three, the Sisters who have come to us?
(his error) is left out [1]. Therefore on the tenth day, the Avivakya, one should not point out (errors) to
12. They (the enemies) shall float down like a boat cut loose from its moorings! There is no returning again for
39 O Bride! In the presence of the sacred fire have you been given to your husband. May you live long
6 Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, and let our fires mount upward with a lofty
8. That might of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought together, like
illness he should offer this oblation to the Adityas; verily he has recourse to the Adityas with their own
Down on the Soma swooped the rapid Falcon. Bright was the young Sage moving mid his cattle.
he thus offers to them in sacrifice; in that he brings the Anvaharya mess--the Brahmans are the gods
6. O Indra, thou art far-renowned, impetuous Lord of power and might.
exaltation) is fixed; Time is the lord of everything, he was the father of Pragâpati.
3. (The brilliancy) that is in the chariot, the dice, in the strenath of the bull; in the wind, Parganya, and in the fire of
May Indra drink of this, our guest aforetime, Celestial King of the strong draught of Soma.
11 Between both poles the car-horse goes pressed closely, as in his dwelling moves the doublywedded.
14 Indra, preserve thou us from this affliction Thunder-armed, save us from the misery near us.
Skilled, bear us past, as in a boat o'er water: as battling Hero save us from the foeman.
the metres. In that he measures with a verse in the Atichandas metre, he makes it the highest of its peers.
thus offers the Agnihotra obtains as much as by offering the Agnistoma; he who knowing thus offers the
e Thou art a bowl made of the rock, may the rock recognize thee.
2. Do thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of the sea,
What time the feathered shafts are flying in the air, the arrows with their sharpened points.
Thou givest wealth and treasure to the worshipper. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
13 Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and bright with gold,
1.2.22 Mantra 22 – Indra (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
He speeds over the sloping surface of the land: new deeds hath he performed with those who gird him
A lovely thing for fathers who have gathered here,-a joy to husbands,-are the wives their arms shall
24 He who beholds mankind, made pure with filters, the King supreme of Deities and mortals,
4.6.94 Sukta 94 – Charm to bring about Submission to one’s will
May the Adityas, the Rudras, the Vasus, be present at the rite;
27 The tribes who bring oblations call to thee, to thee to give them help,
2 For thou art offering-bearer and loved messenger, the charioteer of sacrifice:
Tristubh metre; for twelve the Adityas, they conquered the sky, the Jagati metre; then they attained
Offer this draught, like Vita in the region: clothe him with Soma even as steeds with trappings.
connected with the Gayatri; verily at the morning pressing he produces the metres in the response; now
Exceeding mighty be your arms, that none may wound or injure you.
4. By means of the invigorating gangida, bestowed by the gods as an amulet, do we conquer in battle the
Dharma Veda will NOT be a closed canon - frozen in time based upon mindless dogmas. It will be
The during fires enjoy things given and things not given, the during fires enjoy as food.
Sweet with the liquor of the stalk, as one who wakes, into the vat that drops with meath.
Come, much-invoked, and on our grass be seated ' wealthy, deserving worship, for our welfare.
power, the midday pressing is power [3]; verily at the midday pressing he bestows power upon himself.
14 Thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend: those scorn thee who are flown with wine.
1. LORD of the path, O Pusan, we have yoked and bound thee to our hymn,
Do not, thou that hast been dug with the spade, cause injury!
11 Spouses of Heroes, Goddesses, with whole wings may they come to us
7. The roaring Soma drops flow on, like milch-kine lowing to, their calves:
8 O Lord, O Varuna, may this laudation come close to thed and lie within thy spirit.
Let them protect my foot from slipping on the way: yea, let the drops I drink preserve me from disease.
8 O Lord! Because of your grace men live unharmed, are blessed with children, and become wealthy.
5. Slain are they who are inmates with him, slain are his neighbours; moreover all the quite tiny worms are slain.
sets it up in the place where the altar and the edge (outside) meet, for the winning of both worlds. He
16 Great, verily, are they, O thou Protector, who by their songs of praise have won the blessing.
Far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away.
18. Let this man remain right here, ye gods, let him not depart hence to yonder world! We rescue him from death
potsherds to Indra Çunasira, milk to Vayu, to Sarya on one potsherd; the sacrificial fee is a plough for
children; and may I never fail to be worshipful to you.
Indu, enjoying Indra's friendship, bring us - as a swift steed the car - forward to riches.
The Adityas and the Angirases piled up the fires, they desired to obtain the new and the full moon
May Nodhas, ever praising the protection of that dear Friend, gain quickly strength heroic.
O Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who knowest all and drink the Soma.
By thee were brought together all existing things, possessor of all Godhead, All-effecting God.
2. May we, O Vasu, be most near to this thy bounty, food, and wealth!
drink. The gods drove away the Asuras who were in front by the sacrifices which they offered on the
30 Who for ourselves, O thou Most Wise, is wealth and fair intelligence,
i Thou art the plank' of wood, may the skin of Aditi recognize thee.
Varuna's noose; by the offering to Sarasvati he bestows speech; all the gods are Agni, the sacrifice is
6. He brandishes his horns on high, and whets them, bull who leads the herd,
The previous verse mentioned that the ahankāra vimūḍhātmā (those who are bewildered by the ego and misidentify themselves with the body) think themselves to be the doers. This verse talks about the tattva-vit, or the knowers of the Truth. Having thus abolished the ego, they are free from bodily identifications, and are able to discern their spiritual identity distinct from the corporeal body. Hence, they are not beguiled into thinking of themselves as the doers of their material actions, and instead they attribute every activity to the movements of the three guṇas. Such God-realized Saints say: jo karai so hari karai, hota kabīr kabīr [v17] “God is doing everything, but people are thinking that I am doing.”
Lord of Bays, Indra, brandishing his thunder, is gratified with Soma at the banquet.
to be omitted after the half-verse, that would be as when one is left behind those that are running. The
1.125.6, 1.125.7, 1.147.4, 1.150.2, 1.154.5, 1.164.6, 1.164.45, 1.164.46, 1.179.3, 1.185.1, 1.185.3,
To Ghosa, living in her father's dwelling, stricken in years, ye gave a husband, Asvins.
5. Fight shy of the medicine which thy mother and thy father, thy sister and thy brother let out against thee: I shall
8 As in this place, O Holy Ones, ye Vasus freed even the Gaud when her feet were fettered.
fearlessness envelope us from the front, the back, below and above.
projections; by it the gods made piercings of hundreds of the Asuras; in that he takes up the kindlingstick with this verse, the sacrificer hurls the hundred-slaying (verse) as a bolt against his enemy to lay
11 The mighty Heaven and Earth, those bright expanses that have no wheels, joyed, Indra, at thine
mixed with honey; verily he makes him ready; curds is a food of the village, honey of the wild; in that
choose a boon; through me shall ye obtain all your desires, but the oblation shall come to me before (it
Lord of a Hundred Powers, may we once firmly cling to thy fair favours even as husbands to their
5. The spells shall take effect upon him that prepares the spells, the curse upon him that pronounces the curse!
4 May ringing press-stones keep the Raksasas afar, ill dream, and Nirrti, and each voracious fiend.
e To Agni, slayer of Raksases, hail! To Yama, Savitr, Varuna, Brhaspati, the worshipful, the slayer of
Arjun was famous as a mighty warrior and a worthy opponent for even the most valiant of the Kauravas warriors, such as Bheeshma, Dronacharya, Karn, etc. He had attained fame by fighting many celestial gods. He had fought and overwhelmed even Lord Shiv, who had come in the disguise of a hunter. Pleased with his valor and skill, Lord Shiv had rewarded him with a celestial weapon, called Pāshupatāstra. His teacher at archery, Dronacharya, had also bestowed his blessings upon him in the form of a special weapon. Just before the start of the battle, if Arjun were to retire from the battlefield, these gallant warriors wouldn’t know that affection for his relatives had inspired him to flee. They would consider him a coward, and assume that he had abstained from the war in dread of their prowess.
11 Thy reins are very bulls in strength, bulls' strength is in thy golden whip.
for whom knowing thus the Ançu is drawn, prospers. He draws from (the Soma) when it has been once
e O ye six spaces divine, for us make broad room;
He draws the Prana, cups; so much is there as are these cups, these Stomas, these metres, these Prstha
8 Him in whose hands they say are stored all treasures from the days of old,
'Thee, O Agni, with the mind have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the fervour have I obtained; thee, O
two, then three, then four; this indeed is the awl-shaped intermediate consecration; verily there is
Urdhvanabhas, the offspring of the Maruts', he says; Urdhvanabhas, the offspring of the Maruts, used to
12. The pratihâra-passages (in the sâman-songs), and their final syllables, the (soma-sacrifices called) visvagit
'To him that sits in man hail!' (with these words) he pours butter on; verily with the Pankti and the
So quickly, mid the Gods, ye gained immortal life. Vajas and Rbhus, your great work must be extolled.
Where lie, then, all the sacred logs of Agni that lead him God-ward, Varuna and Mitra?
5 To-day I laud this name, O gipivista, I, skilled in rules, the name of thee the Noble.
2 Agni, burn down the word within their bodies through our newest speech,
The Supreme Divine Personality, Shree Krishna, now gives the link between the control of the mind and success in Yog. He says that those who have not learnt to bridle the mind through abhyās and vairāgya find great difficulty in the practice of Yog. But those who have brought the mind under their control through persistent effort can achieve success by adopting the proper means. The perfect process has already been described by him from verses 6.10 to 6.32. It includes subduing the senses, giving up all desires, focusing the mind upon God alone, thinking of him with an unwavering mind, and seeing everyone with equal vision.This statement creates a doubt in Arjun’s mind regarding the sādhak who is unable to control the mind, and he now questions Shree Krishna in this regard.
Break them with thy wide-spreading foot, with thy wide-spreading mighty foot.
do animals move their limbs, for support. With those (put down) on the east Vasistha prospered, with
Others get offspring of another parent he goeth, as a noble Bull, with others.
7 Even as a herd that crops the grass he shears the field and wilderness,
hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne for twelve days; verily is he propagated. Thereby
comes bestowing gifts, there life's breath, and there immortality has settled down.
should oil the axle with it; verily he extends the sacrifice in the mouth of the sacrifice. They lead Agni
Agnistoma, with the Trivrt (Stoma), in praise of Agni, with verses addressed to Agni; verily he wins
The ascetic sādhanā, explained in the previous two verses, can lead to ātma jñāna (knowledge of the self). But brahma jñāna (knowledge of God) requires the grace of God, which comes through devotion. The words sarva loka maheśhwaram mean “Sovereign Lord of all the worlds,” and suhṛidaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ means “benevolent well-wisher of all living beings.” In this way, He emphasizes that the ascetic path too is consummated in surrender to God, with the knowledge that the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer of all austerities and sacrifices. Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj has put this very nicely:hari kā viyogī jīva govind rādhe, sañcho yog soī jo hari se milāde(Rādhā Govind Geet)“The soul is disconnected from God since eternity. True Yog is that which unites the soul with the Lord.” Hence, no system of Yog is complete without the inclusion of bhakti.In His “Song of God,” Shree Krishna beautifully includes all the genuine paths of spiritual practice, but each time, at the end He qualifies them by stating that success in these paths also requires bhakti. For example, He uses this system of presentation in verses 6.46-47, 8.22, 11.53-54, 18.54-55, etc. Here too, Shree Krishna ends the topic revealing the necessity of devotion.
3. O Agni, to a great heroic deed thou wast aroused, to cook the Brahman's porridge, O Gâtavedas! The seven
Grant us protection, O ye gracious Goddesses, ye who are on the earth or in the waters' realm.
wandering among men [1] and physicians.' Therefore a Brahman should not practise medicine, for the
rather they say, 'The beast is led to the world of heaven' [1]; if he were not to grasp hold of it, the
they approach the fire in reverence. 'Thou art brilliance; grant me brilliance', he says; verily he bestows
with tapas (creative fervour). He, when he has bathed, shines vigorously upon the earth, brown and ruddy.
When, Indu, thou art. balmed with milk within the bowl, thou sinkest in the jars, O Soma, when
clothed in grass, be thou kindly disposed; give us, moreover, wealth along with heroes!
4 Even as true knower of the Law, O Agni, to this our solemn rite he thou attentive.
He compassethwith rays the lofty dwelling-place, Agni, sent forward by the Gods, enriched with piayer.
16. Ukkhishta, the father of the generator, the grandson of the spirit (asu), the primal ancestor (grandfather), the
In this, or is it not, thine hero exploit, Indra? Declare it at the proper season.
7 Agni, these brilliant flames of thine wax like strong chargers mightily,
9 When from the space between the near and far thou art invoked by us,
3 Send thy spies forward, flectest in thy motion; be, ne'er deceived, the guardian of this people
3 Mortals! You owe your daily birth to the Lord, who with the rays of the morning Sun
The Rsis could not see Indra face to face; Vasistha saw him face to face; he said, 'Holy lore shall I
By means of the sacrifice Prajapati created offspring; verily he created them by the subsidiary sacrifices;
Bring thou the Matron: we will rub Agni in ancient fashion forth.
sacrifice, may the ear prosper through the sacrifice, may mind prosper through the sacrifice, may speech
1. DRINK Soma, Mighty One, for which, when lauded, thou breakest through the cattle-stall, O Indra;
May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods, protect us in the shout of onset!
(priest) Brahman', he says, for he is fullest of the holy power (Brahman). 'Do thou guard the sacrifice,
4 Agni, enjoy, of one accord with Ila, striving in rivalry with beams of Sarya,
secretly does he offer it. 'Thee offered to the lord of the Sadas', he says, for completion. They eat; they
side is the more resplendent. 'The sixteenfold Stoma', (with these words he puts down) on the north; the
3. Then straight they recognized the mystic name of the creative Steer,
With Stomas for thy back, rich in ghee, sit thou here,
Like Savitar he hath lifted up his splendour, and like a builder raised his smoke to heaven.
1. For thee this Soma is effused. O Indra: drink of this j uice; for thee the stream is flowing-Soma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, even Indu for thy special drink to cheer thee!
ahungered, one should sacrifice with (the rite) of nine nights, for these worlds are not fitted for them,
that is why it is called post [7]. In that be sets up the post, (it is) to discern the world of heaven. He puts
6 What ye in time of old Indra and Varuna, gave Rsis revelation, thought, and power of song,
6 Auspicious Sita, come thou near: we venerate and worship thee
To Indra hath this welcome hymn that strengthens been uttered by the votary Brhaduktha.
The tāmasic intellect is without the illumination of sublime knowledge. Hence, it misconstrues adharma to be dharma. For example, a drunk is attached to the inebriation that drinking alcohol provides. Hence, his poor intellect, covered with the fog of darkness, cannot even perceive the sheer ruin that he brings onto himself, and he does not even mind selling his property to get his next bottle. In the tāmasic intellect, the faculty of judgment and the ability for logical reasoning become lost.
Sinking into the throat of Indra with a roar, led by the men thou madest Surya mount to heaven.
prosperity. He who desires cattle should offer to Tvastr a horse; Tvastr is the producer of pairings of
1. SING forth and laud with sacred song most active Pavamana, laud
i Ye gods that find the way, finding the way, go on the way.
offspring. Come hither, O Vasu, preceded by wealth; thou art dear to my heart.
14 Now all that we, thy faithful servants, Agni, have done with feet, with hands, and with our bodies,
4.6.77 Sukta 77 – Charm to cause the return of a Truant Woman
him whom he has previously addressed [4]. He gathers with four (verses), the metres are four; verily (he
5 Within thy belly, Indra, take juice, Soma the most excellent: Thine are the drops celestial.
c Thou art the sovereign, the western quarter [1]; the Adityas, the deities, are thine overlords, Soma
6 When with their arms they rub him straight he shineth forth like a strong courser, red in colour, in the
'With thy top graze not the sky, with thy middle harm not the atmosphere', he says; verily he makes it
metre. In that there is (an offering) on twelve potsherds, the Jagati has twelve syllables, and the third
Twins even diffier in their strength and vigour: two, even kinsmen, differ in their bounty.
23. The serpents that are sprung from the fire, that are sprung from the plants, that are sprung from the water,
his speech; thrice he utters 'Him'; verily thus he chooses the Udgatrs; the Agrayana is Prajapati; in that
Foremost be Visnu, stronger than the strongest: for glorious is his name who lives for ever.
are the quarters; verily in the quarters they find support. There can be no Sattra where there is no
t On the impulse of the god Savitr wise ones perform the rite.
also possessed of an abode. He separates it into four pieces; verily he finds supports in the quarters; he
If it be ready, offer it; unready, ye have been remise.
8 Flow onward to the stream of meath rest efficacious in thy home,
15 The hero Pathya kindled thee the Dasyus'. most destructive foe,
With man's measure he metes out; man is commensurate with the sacrifice; verily he metes him with a
1. THEY who lay quiet for a year, the Brahmans who fulfil their vows,
heaven. The Angirases went to the world of heaven from a place of sacrifice elevated in three places. It
1. COME, we have pressed the juice for thee; O Indra, drink this Soma here
he puts down the naturally perforated bricks with these exclamations, he puts down these worlds, and
Let not my thread, while I weave song, be severed, nor my work's sum, before the time, be shattered.
10 Endowed with understanding, I have uttered this truth, for all to hear, to Earth and Heaven.
3 Round the oblations hath he paced, Agni the Wise, the Lord of Strength,
7 Immortal, Sacrificer, God, with wondrous power he leads the way,
1. I dig up this plant, of herbs the most potent, by whose power rival women are overcome, and husbands are
7 Who knows what vital ower he wins, drinking beside the flowing juice?
I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car-wheels let us speed to meet each other.
being bought; Mitra when purchased; Çipivista when put in place; delighter of men when being drawn
h Homage to him of the hole,' and to him of the pool.
instigation. 'Night and the dawn', with (this as) second; verily he raises him with day and night. 'The
8 May the Wealth-Giver grant us conquering riches; may the Wealth-Giver grant us wealth with heroes.
Within the Garhapatya much variegated work is performed; with two verses to Agni, the purifier, he
on eight potsherds at the new moon, and the curds for Indra [1]. He offered it, and by it he won the gods
4. Verily, Surya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great!
pays reverence to the Garhapatya; verily he purifies the fire, he purifies himself; (he uses) two for
2 Yea, mighty I esteem his Godlike nature: none hindereth what he hath once determined.
5 Now Brahmanaspati speaks forth aloud the solemn hymn of praise,
muttering; therefore the kingly power speaks above the people. (The offerings) are for the Maruts; the
They who drive spotted steeds, sent down by Prsni, gave ear, the Warriors and the harnessed horses.
they come to ruin', he should make an offering in the Agnidh's altar with the Rc containing the word
3 When at the coming of the Rains the water has poured upon them as they yearned and thirsted,
1. FOR thee this Soma is effused, O Indra: drink of this juice; for thee the stream is flowingSoma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, even Indu, for thy special drink to cheer thee.
He smote away the obstructors with his thunder, and eager for their course forth flowed the waters.
'paying of homage' (and beginning), 'What then?' Verily he appropriates their paying of homage and
Here have we Mitra, Varuna, and Pusan to overcome the foeman's domination.
In thee have they heaped viands various, many formed; wealthborn, of wondrous help are they.
6. The sorcerer who prepares a spell, or manipulates the roots (of plants) against us, against him, ye strong gods,
2 A far-extended pillar that supports the sky the Soma-stalk, filled full, moves itself every way.
15 Bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in thousands, source
the sacrifice; verily he delights him, and he being delighted is purified for him with prosperity. He who
verily in the seasons the year finds support. These are the bricks [2], called the over-ladies; he for whom
8 Set thee, O Priest, in, thine own place, observant: lay down the sacrifice in the home of worship.
4. Come hither, Indra, with bay steeds, joyous, with tails like peacock's plumes!
Soma comes onward like a youth with youthful maids, and gains the beaker by a course of hundred paths.
7 Lovers of Sweetness, we have brought this treasure to you as 'twere an envoy sent for friendship.
Shree Krishna now puts the previously described sacrifices in proper perspective. He tells Arjun that it is good to do physical acts of devotion, but not good enough. Ritualistic ceremonies, fasts, mantra chants, holy pilgrimages, are all fine, but if they are not performed with knowledge, they remain mere physical activities. Such mechanical activities are better than not doing anything at all, but they are not sufficient to purify the mind.Many people chant God’s name on rosary beads, sit in recitations of the scriptures, visit holy places, and perform worship ceremonies, with the belief that the physical act itself is sufficient for liberating them from material bondage. However, Saint Kabir rejects this idea very eloquently:mālā pherata yuga phirā, phirā na mana kā pher,kar kā manakā ḍāri ke, manakā manakā pher [v27]“O spiritual aspirant, you have been rotating the chanting beads for many ages, but the mischief of the mind has not ceased. Now put those beads down, and rotate the beads of the mind.” Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj says:bandhan aur mokṣha kā, kāraṇ manahi bakhānyāte kauniu bhakti karu, karu man te haridhyān(Bhakti Shatak verse 19)[v28]“The cause of bondage and liberation is the mind. Whatever form of devotion you do, engage your mind in meditating upon God.”Devotional sentiments are nourished by the cultivation of knowledge. For example, let us say that it is your birthday party, and people are coming and handing you gifts. Someone comes and gives you a ragged bag. You look at it disdainfully, thinking it is insignificant in comparison to the other wonderful gifts you have received. That person requests you to look inside the bag. You open it and find a stack of one hundred notes of $100 denomination. You immediately hug the bag to your chest, and say, “This is the best gift I have received.” Knowledge of its contents developed love for the object. Similarly, cultivating knowledge of God and our relationship with him nurtures devotional sentiments. Hence, Shree Krishna explains to Arjun that sacrifices performed in knowledge are superior to the sacrifice of material things.  He now explains the process of acquiring knowledge.
3. Flow onward mighty with thy stream, inspiriting the Maruts' Lord, winning all riches with thy power!
7 The mightiest song is Agni's: shine on high, thou who art rich in light.
4 For ye, O Indra-Vayu, mount the goldenseated car that aids
4.4.37 Sukta 37 – Charm with the plant, Agasringi, to drive out Rakshas, Apsaras and
9 Even as a herdsman I have brought thee hymns of praise: O Father of the Maruts, give us happiness,
Thee, Lord divine, with ears to hear, most famous, mens' generations magnify with praise-songs.
8 They, longing for the kine, with faithful spirit incited with their hymns the Lord of cattle.
5 For you shall Ausija call him who thunders, as, to win Arjuna's assent, cried Ghosa.
9 Born is the pious hero swift of hearing, like gold in hue, well formed, and full of vigour.
3 Soma flows on when purified, beloved and adorned with songs,
Turn to us, Indra-Vayu, ye to whom the sacrifice is paid.
O'ercome the malice of the foe, fight down the malice ofthe foe.
sacrificer. 'For that thee, for Prajapati, of bounteous gifts, full of light, (thee) full of light I offer' [2], he
share to the gods, secretly to the Asuras. Men promise openly the share to every one; if they promise any
The word karm yog has been used in this verse. It consists of two main concepts: karm (occupational duties) and Yog (union with God). Hence, a karm yogi is one who performs worldly duties while keeping the mind attached to God. Such a karm yogi is not bound by karma even while performing all kinds of works. This is because what binds one to the law of karma is not actions, but the attachment to the fruits of those actions. And a karm yogi has no attachment to the fruits of action. On the other hand, a false renunciant renounces action, but does not forsake attachment, and thus remains bound in the law of karma.Shree Krishna says here that a person in household life who practices karm yog is superior to the false renunciant who continues to dwell on the objects of the senses in the mind. Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj contrasts these two situations very beautifully:mana hari meṅ tana jagat meṅ, karmayog tehi jānatana hari meṅ mana jagat meṅ, yaha mahāna ajñāna(Bhakti Śhatak verse 84)[v3]“When one works in the world with the body, but keeps the mind attached to God, know it to be karm yog. When one engages in spirituality with the body, but keeps the mind attached to the world, know it to be hypocrisy.”
purified for us, with healing for cattle, healing for men, healing for the horses, healing, O king, for the
'He shall prosper who shall pile me again hence.' The gods piled him; then they prospered; in that they
24 And, hymned by Jamadagnis, let all nourishment that kine supply,
and sacrificial. One should not approach a woman on the new moon or the full moon night; if one were
pays reverence to the fire. May we (set) thee around, O Agni, as a fort', he says; verily he sets around a
All car were thy two chariot wheels: thy path was tremulous in the sky,
7 Come nigh, O Bold One, boldly bring hither the riches of the churl
2 The Darter penetrated, though in trouble, thrice-seven close-pressed ridges of the mountains.
Gracious like peace, blessing like mental power, Priest was he, offering-bearer, full of thought.
2 Sublime from birth, mayst thou O Indra, Hero, with Surya overcome the Dasa races.
Wherewith Trisoka drove forth his recovered cows,-Come hither unto us, O Asvins, with those aids.
1. Do homage unto Varuna's and Mitra's Eye: offer this solemn worship to the Mighty God,
6 The maids Sujirni, Sreni, Sumne-api, Charanyu, Granthini, and Hradecaksus,These like red kine have hastened forth, the bright ones, and like milch-cows have lowed in emulation.
mount upon these worlds. The Tryahas go in order; verily in order they mount the world of heaven [2].
He conquers godless and malign enchantments, and sharpens both his horns to gore the Raksas.
10 Like as a father bears his son, O Agni, Vadhryasva bare thee in his lap and served thee.
2.5.5.7 Mantra 7: The Rule as to the Number of Stakes
2 At thine effusion upward rise three voices full of joy, when thou
2.2.5.6 Mantra 6: The New and Full Moon Sacrifices as compared with Soma Sacrifices
Agni they offer the Vajaprasaviya. In that he offers the Vajaprasaviya, he unites Agni with his own
As such, O Maghavan, Indra, who lovest song, even as a lover bear my call.
so he here seeks his portion; if he were not to offer a libation to him, he would suck the Adhvaryu and
potsherds to Agni and Soma; the Brahman is connected with Agni, he drinks Soma; verily he has
25 Agni, to thee whose laws stand fast our resonant songs of praise speed forth,
Yea, let young children sing their lauds as a strong castle praise ye him.
4 He brandishes his horns on high, and whets them Bull who leads the herd,
2 May the stone draw thee as it speaks, the Soma-stone with ringing voice.
7 So among mortals was Immortal Agni stablished as holy wise and willing envoy.
26 Yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, Indra, thou governest the folk.
Wealth, Agni, with brave sons and ready for his use: welcome the man who comes with fuel unto thee.
3 These are, each one, our present helps, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman.
All ear to him who seeks his love and wealth to him who strives for fame,
I, Varuna, thou glorious Lord, have entered thy lofty home, thine house with thousand portals.
His Bay Steeds well maintain his power eternal, at one time bright and darksome at another.
form he approaches their form, in that (he approaches) with gold. 'May Tutha, all knowing, allot to you',
5 He with his might made firm the forward-bending hills, the downward rushing of the waters he
9. Bring to us all things excellent, O Satakratu, food and strength,
The Rc and the Saman, unwilling to remain with the gods for the sacrifice, taking the form of a black
2.5.2.11 Mantra 11: The Marking out of the Lines of the Horse
(seizure) has caught hold (gagrâha) of this person here, may Indra and Agni free him from that!
3. This herb shall make thee so very full of lusty strength, that thou shalt, when thou art excited, exhale
3 The Youthful One, well-shaped, with four locks braided, brightened with oil, puts on the ordinances.
earth should he offer it who in ploughing desires support; verily from the sky Parjanya rains for him,
His majesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his power where holy singers rule.
15 If, Sakra, Vrtra-slayer, thou be far away or near to us.
Rich with the light ofheaven was then the help ye gave, and marvellous your succour when ye stood by
friendship, become exempt from decay. Be caring to us like a father is to his children.
Strengthened by songs of praise thou rentest piecemeal the Dasa, him who deemed himself immortal.
prosperous. He who has been expelled or is being expelled should offer an oblation to the Adityas, the
summers. May I remain pure and sinless a hundred summers. Yes, May I achieve all of this for even more than
8 And truly those two noble bays I straightway took when offered me,
Agnidh's altar; the Agnidh's altar is the invincible part of the sacrifice; verily he places (them) on the
9 None lives, even had he hundred lives, beyond the statute of the Gods
drives away his enemies. With two verses containing the word 'strength', he accompanies the separation
1. Clinging to the ground thou didst grow, (O plant), that producest bliss for me; a hundred branches extend from
'Thou art the eastern', they conquered the eastern quarter; (with) 'Thou art the zenith', they conquered
The Hero, waxing, after draughts of Soma, blew far from heaven the Dasyus with his weapon.
4 Let us not anger thee with worship, Rudra, ill praise, Strong God! or mingled invocation.
All these our deeds the singer hath considered. Let Nirrti depart to distant places.
10. Since we have come upon tile wretched (spell), as upon (a cow) with a dead calf, flooded away (by a river),
5 O Heaven our Father, Earth our guileless Mother, O Brother Agni, and ye Vasus, bless us.
The Maruts in the votary's house adorned thee; with lauds the Bhrgus gave thee light and glory.
butter, he takes again cattle for him. The speckled butter is the breath; his breath [2] falls, if his speckled
secretly offers. 'To the gods that drink the rays thee!' he says; the gods that drink the rays are the rays of
10 Whether, O Indra-Agni, ye be dwelling in highest earth, in central, or in lowest,
11 Help us, O Indra, when we pray to thee for wealth and hero might.
The bow of thine, O Rudra, in the east [2], may the wind blow after it for thee, to thee, O Rudra, with
Thou Jatavedas who art skilled in guiding, the chief high saving sacrifice's Leader.
nature, thence [4] does he win him. Now he who removes the fire is the slayer of the hero among the
the sacrificial fee is a bull. To the All-gods (he offers) an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a tawny heifer.
4 Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while they are revelling in the flow of waters,
6 Thy spirit, that went far away to beams of light that flash and flow,
4 The lofty battle-car thou broughtest forward; thou holpest Dasadyu the strong when fighting.
3. (May it envelop) thee unto (long) life, unto lustre, unto force, and unto strength, that thou shalt by the brilliancy
Soma-drops rich in meath, waves, to the Thunder-armed, to Indra, like milch-kine who seek their calf
w I implore this of thee, praising thee with my hymn;
4 These juices which, O Food, are thine throughout the regions are diffused.
4 Kind, Furtherer of men, he comes, when he hath reached the ends of heaven,
the Rudras said, 'Ye have been propagated, let us be propagated.' They gave it to the Rudras; they bore it
The Hero is renowned for gathering riches. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
I cry to Dhisana, Mother of opulence. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
Give with thy might abundant vital force, and aid us graciously in gaining riches.
11 The Maruts, those who have sustained and propped the heavens and earth apart,
to pierce (it), Rudra would be likely to slay his cattle; if he were not to pierce (it), it would not be fixed;
1. Yea, verily thou art a Bull, our guardian, rushing like a bull:
6 He who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thousand mighty men of war.
Through this came vital power which lengthens out our days, and kinship through its help awoke.
11 Praise him whose bow is strong and sure his arrow, him who is Lord of every balm that bealeth.
Shakers of all, rejoicing, slayers of the foe, give riches to the Soma-pressing worshipper.
b In the seat of Agni whose home is abiding I set you down, kindly
32 With splendour, riches, and renown, O Asvins, hither come to us,
10 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us glory and great shelter spreading far.
Calling the heavenly Priest to share the banquet, who rends the wood, bright, with his blackened
repeat, 'Me will he choose, me' [6]. 'Choose ye the bearer of the oblation', he says; 'let him choose him
thy household fire,-19. The hostile, insidious instrument which they have brought hither has been discovered; that which has been
To sit on sacred grass at this our worship, I call Vivasvan, too, thy Father hither.
the bricks of him who has established a sacred fire are the days and nights; in that he offers evening and
4 Indra, Song -lover, here for thee the worshipper's libation flows.
3 Those who gave increase to thy strength and vigour; the Maruts singing forth thy might, O Indra.
May he bestow on us food, strength, and riches. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.
Not only may I keep sickness out of my body, I should also remove sinful thoughts from my mind, and
With thy wealth-procuring, great, golden hook, O Indra, husband of Sakî, procure a wife for me that desireth a
6 So, through the days maintaining princely power. ye prop the height as 'twere from loftiest heaven.
3 He who with might the Five Lands hath pervaded, like Surya with his lustre, and the watersHis strength wins hundreds, thousands none avert it, as- the young maid repelleth not her lover.
Stomas are prosperity. Atri who had faith as his deity and offered sacrifices was not visited by the four
2 Forth come your viands rich with store of pleasant meath, and cars and horses at the flushing of the
7 Whom from of old there is not one to hinder, none to curtail the riches of his bounty.
We find countless devotees around us engaging in devotion toward the celestial gods, with unflinching faith and wonder, how people develop such high faith in the lower form of worship? In this verse, Shree Krishna answers this and says that He is the creator of the faith in the celestial gods as well. When He finds people worshiping the devatāsfor the fulfillment of their material desires, He helps them in their devotion and steadies their faith. The ability to create śhraddhā or faith is beyond the capacity of the celestial gods; it is the indwelling Paramātmāor the Supreme Soul who inspires faith in the hearts of the devotees. Later in the Bhagavad Gita verse 15.15, He states, “I am seated in the hearts of all living beings, and from Me come memory, knowledge, as well as forgetfulness. I alone am to be known by all the Vedas, am the author of the Vedant, and the knower of the meaning of the Vedas.”Shree Krishna had earlier mentioned that those who are in true-knowledge engage in the highest and the most beneficial kind of śhraddhāthat is to worship the Supreme Lord. Then one might ask, why the Supreme Lord creates faith in people toward the celestial gods—is it not inappropriate?Let us look at this example of parents giving dolls to their small children. The child plays with these dolls as if they were real people and develops love and affection towards them. The parents are aware of the child’s innocence, yet they encourage this play to help the child develop the qualities of love, care, and affection towards other people. These qualities will help children become socially responsible when they grow up.Similarly, our eternal parent God is aware of our ignorance. Hence, when He finds that some souls engage in worship of the celestial gods for material gains, He helps them by steading their faith. He is aware that this experience will help in the evolution of the soul, and once they acquire true-knowledge that the Supreme Lord is the summum bonum or the highest good of everything, they will surrender to Him.
Do thou shine with wealth for us, O thou of many faces.
2 Swift in their motion, hasting to their duty, reaching the central point of life immortal,
Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides most munificent.
Enjoys each precious thing, O God, O Agni, gains wealth of corn and is the lord of treasures.
May Indra, Vibhvan, Vaja, and Rbhuksan destroy by turns the wicked foeman's valour.
pure, fit for sacrifice, and divine, that was set free. They became the Vahantis. He takes of the Vahantis;
1.2.39 Mantra 39 – Ashvins (Authors: Grtsamada Saunahotra; later Grtsamada Saunaka)
c May the wives of the gods [1], the goddesses, connected with the All-gods, place thee on the abode of
9 She hath spread us beyond all foes, beyond her Sisters, Holy One,
up. 'Thee that art winner of Brahmans, winner of nobles', he says; that is according to the text. 'With
Indra excels all usurers who see the day, excels all traffickers in strength.
I. As rain from out the cloud, for you, Indra and Agni, from my thought
in the same place; the Viraj has ten syllables; verily having obtained the Viraj, he makes it into a brick
When by the force of thy descending thunder, at the mere solund, their boldest was demolished.
unfold the sacrifice, upon which are set up, in front of the sacrifice, the sacrificial posts, erect and brilliant, that
were together; separating they said, 'Let us share together what is worthy of sacrifice'. What of yonder
arranged the cattle in this world with the two Tryahas. By means of the Prsthas the Adityas prospered in
To Vimada ye brought his consort Kamadyu, and gave his lost Visnapu back to Visvaka.
The Rsis came to him, seven holy singers, when in the bowls he settled as Invoker.
Hastening like a car to men, to those who live, the God without delay gives boons to be desired.
2 Gandharvi spake: may she, the Lady of the flood, amid the river's roaring leave my heart untouched.
offspring to Viçvakarman he was set free from evil; in that he offers a libation to Agni of the front, Agni
Stoma.' 'What by the tenth?' 'The Viraj with its ten syllables.' 'What by the eleventh?' 'The Tristubh with
Let all the people wish for thee let not thy kingship fall away.
who is of the gods. He chooses one of a Rsi's family; verily he departs not from the connexion, (and so it
weapons, do thou subject to us, anticipating (our wish) by deed!
Agni and Dadhikras and Dawn the Goddess, you, Gods with Indra, I call down to help us.
19 Rich was the gift Kurunga gave, a hundred steeds at morning rites.
32 He whose good bounty, thousandfold, swift as the rushing of the wind,
10 Incline the Asvins to show grace, and Pusan, for power and might have they, their own possession.
Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, priest-like, in his place.
Soma found a thousand; Indra discovered it after him. Yama approached them and said to them, 'May I
2.3.5.1 Mantra 1: The Introductory Rite of the New and Full Moon Sacrifices
a Homage to the strong, the piercing, to the lord of assailers homage!
Her who hath straightway poured me food in plenty: Indra and Agni therefore are her praisers.
p O thou of various splendour, in safety may I reach the end of thee.
19. The armour of Indra and Agni, that is thick and strong, all the gods united do not pierce. This great (armour)
Therefore a man can contract all the other members (of the body) except the head, but the bead not. The
3 In whose wild joy thou settest free the kine held fast within the rock,
Krsanu, Tisya, archers to our gathering-place, and Rudra strong amid the Rudras we invoke.
altar; verily he makes the sacrificial rite larger, his offspring does not become worse than himself.
I call, that he, as he is wont, may aid the chariots and the men.
a Thou art the caul of the kingly class, thou art the womb of the kingly class.
19 Wherewith ye brought awife for Vimada to wed, wherewith ye freely gave the ruddy cows away;
19 Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in: these are my Gods; I in full strength am present.
covering metre; the mind metre; the expanse metre; the river metre; the sea metro; the water metre; the
3. When priests who magnify the Son of holy law present their gifts,
7 E'en now, O Indra-Agni, men hold in their arms and stretch their bows.
and the seat, and between the seat and the Garhapatya fire. That is a place of sacrifice elevated in three
body is the twenty first; he thus completely purifies the man [8]. He says, 'Let the lord of thought purify
6. In mighty battle we invoke Indra, Indra is lesser fight,
39 Upon what syllable of holy praise-song, as twere their highest heaven, the Gods repose them,Who knows not this, what will he do with praise-song? But they who know it well sit here assembled.
Brilliant with Ukthas, Soma joined Anustup: Brhaspati's voice by Brhati was aided.
verily he offers in that which has fire, the Adhvaryu does not become blind, and the Raksases. do not
Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons: thou, having glowed with Fervour, wortnest heavenly
15 Agni, great vital power is thine, the mighty: pairs waxing old in their devotion seek thee.
2. O Bride and Bridegroom! The angels have united the two of you to make a loving pair. May you be united in
whence he shall not again in all successive years return, while the sun is upon the heavens!
5 Though he might ne'er be wounded still his vitals felt that, the God's bolt, which his powers supported,
6. O Indra, Indra, come thou to the tribes of men, for thou hast agreed, concordant with the Varunas (as if,'the
Bless us, thou Radiant One, for seed and progeny, yea, bless us, O thou Wondrous God.
1. HEAVEN and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speakers of truth, are near enough to hear us,
1. Pressed out by pressers Soma goes over the fleecy backs of sheep,
24 Knowing our chief felicity, O Agni, bring hither ample riches to our nobles,
Best offercr, cheerful, to be praised in holy rites, pure Lord! by singers with their hymns.
acquired the drinking of Sonia; the Açvins are the gods of the bad Brahman who desires to drink Soma;
they shall become this (world)'; they hailed her in rivalry, 'O All worker', said the gods; 'O Deceiver',
contiguous (aptá) place of sacrifice should he make him to sacrifice who has foes. He should make it
between the sacrificial post and the Ahavaniya, to smite away the Raksases. When the beast is offered
To him the Lord of power, the holy synod's might, as to a hill, with speed, ascend the loving ones.
5 Free us from sins committed by our fathers, from those wherein we have ourselves offended.
What charge hast thou for us? Where turns thy journey? How hast thou made thy way o'er Rasa's
9 Hear, thou whose ear is quick, my call; take to thee readily my songs
(with these words) he makes him speak over the last two Udumbara (sticks) [2]; verily by means of the
26 Effused by us let God-delighting Somas bring as they flow a home with noble heroes.
10 From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice.
Onward hath Indu flowed in streams, impelled, surrounded by the wood.
perform the twelve-day (rite) afterwards; verily they perform speech perfectly, and therefore we utter
God’s personality includes His various energies. All manifest and unmanifest objects are but expansions of His energy. Thus, we can say He is all that exists. Accordingly, Shreemad Bhagavatam states:dravyaṁ karma cha kālaśh cha svabhāvo jīva eva chavāsudevāt paro brahman na chānyo ’rtho ’sti tattvataḥ (2.5.14)“The various aspects of creation—time, karma, the natures of individual living beings, and the material ingredients of creation—are all the Supreme Lord Shree Krishna Himself. There is nothing in existence apart from Him.”God may appear to be divided amongst the objects of His creation, but since He is all that exists, He remains undivided as well. For example, space may seem to be divided amongst the objects that it contains. Yet, all objects are within the one entity called space, which manifested at the beginning of creation. Again, the reflection of the sun in puddles of water appears divided, and yet the sun remains indivisible.Just as the ocean throws up waves and then absorbs them back into itself, similarly God creates the world, maintains it, and then absorbs it back into Himself. Therefore, He may be equally seen as the Creator, the Maintainer, and the Destroyer of everything.
Wherewith victorious ye, self-luminous, press onward, with strong reins, decked with gold, impetuous
Shall we not, hostile to our lord, unite ourselves to Indra now?
Extend the same boons unto us, ye Maruts. Give us, O Heroes, wealth with noble offipring.
4.9.8 Sukta 8 – Charm to procure Immunity from all Diseases
Exalters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, some joy in praise and some in our oblation.
2 Thou, Hero, art a warrior, thou art giver of abundant spoil.
1. Flow to the filter with thy stream, effused, to win us spoil and wealth,
3. The mighty Pavamana's roar is heard as 'twere the rush of rain
anoints with that which contains the word 'of a thousand'; Prajapati is of a thousand; (verily it serves) to
1. His life hath been renewed and carried forward as two men, car-borne, by the skilful driver.
23 O Agni, fair of face, the wealthy mortal who to the Immortal offers his oblation.
h All those who are in the Sadas must have presents; he who did not [3] give them a present would fall a
4 That each may see the light, the Bird brought us the guard of Law, the Friend
14 Like rivers rushing down a slope, O Indra, to thee haste songs and prayers and linked verses.
not?' Now the beast is led to death; if he were to grasp hold of it, the sacrificer would be likely to die. Or
with her own share; she sharpens his arrow. Balbaja grass he should fasten to the kindling-stick [1];
7 To thee have we presented this oblation: accept it, Sovran Ruler, free from anger.
47 May all the angels unite our hearts. May the flowing waters unite our hearts. May Matarisvan and
Viraj is this (cow), the skin is its hide, the pressing-boards its udder, the sounding-holes its teats, the
1. THE altar hath been made for thee to rest on: come like a panting courser and be seated.
Varuna on the west support thee upon thy foundation, may Soma on the north hold thee together!
A  tapasvī  (ascetic) is one who accepts voluntary mortification and lives an extremely austere lifestyle, refraining from sensual pleasures and the accumulation of material wealth, as an aid in the pursuit of salvation. A  jñānī  is a person of learning who actively engages in the cultivation of knowledge. A  karmī  is one who performs the Vedic rituals for attaining material opulence and the celestial abodes. Shree Krishna declares the yogi to be superior to them all. The reason for this is simple. The goal of the  karmī, jñānī,  and  tapasvī  is worldly attainment; they are still at the bodily platform of existence. The yogi is striving not for the world, but for God. As a result, the yogi’s accomplishment is at the spiritual platform and is superior to them all.
pressing; the syllables herein are three, [2], the Gayatri has three Padas, the morning pressing is
the Anvaharya mess, he delights the messengers of the gods. Prajapati distributed the sacrifice to the
post is mortar-based, for support. They go forward, for forward as it were is the world of heaven [3].
Pourers of floods, the Maruts, Masters of all wealth, they who can ne'er be conquered, make the
the house, the Sadas, the cakes, the cooked (offerings), the final bath, the cry of 'Godspeed' (prosper for
2 The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, have in the year's courses cleft Vala by Eternal
1.9.101Mantra 101 – Soma Pavamana (Authors: Andhigu Syavasvi, Yayati Nahusa, Nahusa
3. And, finding for us steeds and kine, O Soma, with thy juice flow on
Praise Devavata's Agni, thou Devasravas, him who shall be the people's Lord.
Whom thou, as Varuna in accord with Mitra, guardest, O God, by banishing his trouble.
33 Thine then shall be this high renown, thine shall these lofty praises be,
Nearest of Gods be ye with your protection. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
Kasyapa's charm, that tears out, to either side we do tear it out.
stand with the sacred cord suspended from the right shoulder (prâkinopavita), saying, 'O Pragâpati, watch over
Who gives, as 'twere in thousands, precious wealth to him who sheds the juice and worships him.
k Homage to him of the stream, and to him of the tank
e After piling the fire he should not have intercourse with a woman of pleasure, thinking, 'I shall deposit
Indra's (cake) he should cut off from the All-gods, and then from Indra's [3]; verily with power
The rays, the bright beams of the strong-jawed, mighty, adorable Steer are visible as he cometh.
12 May we, unharmed, serve bountiful Visnu, the God who slayeth none:
To our oblation bring the two Nasatyas, Mitra and Varuna and Earth and Heaven.
them. He takes with a verse of four feet, he places them thrice, they make up seven, the Çakvari has
7 Indra, be firm: a fort art thou. To thine appointed place proceeds
Your worshipper secures your friendship for himself. Through your protection I desire felicity.
1. LET none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us.
8 Agni, the Hotar-priest who fills the assembly full, Waker of knowledge, chief Controller of the thought,Him, yea, none other than thyself, doth man elect at sacrificial offerings great and small alike.
serves) for the overcoming of foes. (A roof of) seventeen coverings (he should fix) for one who desires
7 I travel round about borne onward in my might by the fleet-footed dappled Horses of the Sun.
Slacken the strong bows of the demondriven: destroy our foemen whether kin or stranger.
i The Rudra in the fire, in the waters, in the plants, the Rudra that hath entered all beings, to that Rudra
been taken from him. Therefore he is not suitable for the sacrifice, but is suitable if there is a sacrifice
The Udgatr sings these (verses); verily having borne food from the quarters [4] they place glory in
pressing-stones its calves, the priests the milkers, Soma the milk. He, who knows thus, milks her.
13 This day may all the Maruts, all he near us with aid: may all our fires be well enkindled.
verily in force and strength and in cattle they find support. There are three Trayastrinças before, and
the gold, placing it in the ghee, therefore are offspring produced, through that which is boneless, and yet
(verse containing the word) 'rich' is the Puronuvakya, for atonement, to prevent burning; the Yajya is in
win the Soma-drinking that is here. He throws down (the remnants) on the high altar; the high altar is
1. WITH power and strength, O Mighty God, approach us: be the augmenter, Indra, of these riches;
4 Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe Priest among mankind, oblation-bearer,
syllables; the other three are of eight syllables. The three approach the eight; the four the eight. Because
And, flushing far, splendid and purifying, unbarred the portals of the fold of darkness.
None violates his holy ordinances: that we are his the heavens and earth acknowledge.
3 The man who offers holy oil and burnt oblations unto you,
Both circumjacent Parents come together to yield us length of days they hasten forward.
are six; verily with the seasons he ploughs him. In that (he ploughs) with (a team) of twelve oxen, (he
7 The pourer of libations gains the home of wealth, pouring his gift conciliates hostilities, yea, the
makes it pure. He sprinkles the altar, the altar was rough, hairless, and impure; verily he makes it pure.
Both horses of the cars are yoked,2 She in whose bosom all the Gods, and Sun and Moon for men to see,
Grant this the Treasure-Lord of treasures, coming, observant, oftenest of Gods, with succour!
3. So bringing treasure, shine to-day on us, thou daughter, of the Sky,
Let us, if we have power, pay the God worship: no better prayer than this, ye Gods, acknowledge.
9. They that have prepared thee and taken hold of thee, the cunning wizards-this is what cures it, destroys the
Shree Krishna continues naming the most magnificent in each category to reveal his glories to Arjun. Ucchaihshrava is a celestial winged-horse that belongs to Indra, the king of the celestial abodes. It is white in color and is the fastest horse in the universe. It emerged during the pastime of the churning of the ocean by devas (celestial gods) and asuras (demons). Airavata is a white elephant that serves as the vehicle of Indra. It is also called ardha-mātang, or “the elephant of the clouds.”
6. Attach yourselves, O cows, to me as your possessor; may this stable here cause you to prosper! Upon you,
Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, the Gods, as Friends for friendship, bringing bliss.
8 To him who comes to meet you, Gods, with offerings bathed in holy oilApproach ye, one and all, to him.
May the wind bring you good luck; and May the rivers bring you plenty of clear water for your health.
5 O Agni, quickly come to us, and, glorified, bring precious wealth.
11 Ascend to-day thy splendid car, O Agni, in splendour, with the Holy Ones around it.
14 With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as Lord over these fearless tribes, the Selfresplendent One.
May he by day [1] and night protect us from the foe.
highest of animals; verily by the highest he makes him go to the highest state. It is the twenty-onefold
8 Maghavan weareth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic changes in his body,
therefore he that is possessed of cattle speaks the highest speech. Ten by ten he puts (them) down, to
Distilling oil he flows, fair, billowy, golden-hued, borne on car of light, sharing on home with wealth.
The reason why we all work is because we need something. We are all tiny parts of God, who is an ocean of bliss, and hence we all seek bliss. Since, we have not attained perfect bliss as yet, we feel dissatisfied and incomplete. So whatever we do is for the sake of attaining bliss. However, bliss is one of God’s energies and he alone possesses it to the infinite extent. He is perfect and complete in himself and has no need of anything outside of himself. Thus, he is also called Ātmārām (one who rejoices in the self), Ātma-ratī (one who is attracted to his or her own self), and Ātma-krīḍa (one who performs divine pastimes with his or her own self).If such a personality does work, there can be only one reason for it—it will not be for oneself, rather for the welfare of others. Thus, Shree Krishna tells Arjun that although in his personal form as Shree Krishna, he has no duty to perform in the universe, yet he works for the welfare of others. He next explains the welfare that is accomplished when he works.
Longed-for, young, beautiful, and far-resplendent: and sevendear frieuds sprang up unto the Mighty.
5 Send to us bounty manifold, O Indra, worthy of' our wish,
therewith he smote away the Raksases; in that it is (the hymn) of the Raksas-slaying one, thereby he
5 The youthful Daughter of the Sun, delighting in you, ascended there your chariot, Heroes.
1. Now may our sweetest song with deep devotion reach Varuna, Mitra, Aditi, and Bhaga.
5 Men wonder at his shining glows when, paring the woods with case, o'er the broad earth he goeth,
5 As dear House-Friend, guest welcome in the dwelling, to this our sacrifice come thou who knowest.
syllables won the threefold Stoma [1]; Varuna with ten syllables won the Viraj; Indra with eleven
2 This might of theirs hath no one comprehended. True is the crushing word the sage hath uttered,
10 In pride of beauty like a maid thou goest, O Goddess, to the God who longs to win thee,
he cast the ram at it, it turned to the west; he cast the bull at it, it turned to the north; he cast the goat at
12 Yea, thee, O Agni, do we seek with homage and with fuel, Priest
To thee have streameld the songs or mighty singers, imploring, Indra, drink of our libation.
the flavours, by the boa constrictor serpents, by the tiger wild beasts, by the eagle birds, by the stallion
him together, joint to joint, as the wagoner (Ribhu) the parts of a chariot!
Excellent, Praise of Men, the bard's Supporter, Strong, he gives strength, extolled in holy synod.
The hymn commingles with the cow's oblation. Great is the Gods' supreme and sole dominion.
2 The drops of Soma juice effused fall like the rain upon the earth:
3 Pleased, with thy Bay Steeds, Indra, God, come quickly to this our sacrifice that heightens worship;
4. Take hold by the hand and lead away the spell back to him that prepares it! Place it in his very presence, so
8 Rise up O woman, to the world of the living. Your husband is dead.
So first to thee have pious men resorted, turning thy mind to thoughts of ample riches.
by the Prsthas, the cattle by the Chandomas. The Prsthas are force and strength, the strength, and in
6 I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a stronger spell.
Also in thee is found perfect security thou art the Sovran Lord of wealth.
at the beginning; why then is Atiratra first employed?' The two Atiratras are the eyes of the sacrifice, the
s Homage to your taste, O fathers; homage to your birth, O fathers; homage to your life, O fathers;
13 That fallen Drop of thine, the stalk which from the ladle fell away,
1.8.31 Mantra 31 – Various Deities (Author: Manu Vaivasvata or Kasyapa Marica)
gods, after reciting the kindling-verses, could not discern the sacrifice; Prajapati silently performed [1]
2 So made attentive by our hymns, Steer! Indra! thou fastenedst the girth of thy Bay Coursers,
7. Do thou, O Agni, drag hither the sorcerers, bound in shackles; then Indra with his thunderbolt shall cut off their
The God who wears the helm defends them with his jaws.
away of foes. 'For expiration thee, for inspiration thee', he says; verily he bestows the breaths on the
4 Yea, holy Heaven and Earth, the ancient sages whose word was ever true had power to find you;
c In the impulse of thee, of true impulse, may I win a support for my speech. Hail!
4 The spotless Dawns with fair bright days have broken; they found the spacious light when they were
2. Bring what thou deemest worth the wish, O Indra that which is in heavem!
12 If by some grievous sin we have provoked the Gods, O Deities, with the tongue or thoughtlessness
Ye lifted up the son of Tugra from the floods. At our libations must all these your acts be praised.
So, in like manner, do the forest trees and plants bear him within them and produce him evermore.
(every) device prepared by the fashioner of the spell, (every) misfortune, do I leave behind, as an elephant the
meshes to the Naksatras. The garment is thus connected with all the gods; in that he consecrates him
Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took his station in the height of heaven.
8 The men with stones have milked for thee this nectar of the Soma juice:
Three are the pillars set upon it for support: thrice journey ye by night, O Asvins, thrice by day.
2 When, rising, to the sacrifice we hasten, awaking Dadhikras with adorations.
8 He with one foot hath far outrun the biped, and the two-footed catches the three-footed.
5 Onward, with ever-roaming Rudra, speed the floods: over Aramati the Mighty have they run.
1. Some, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the hymn to thee for mighty strength and
4 Each day that passes, in his house flows his libation, rich in milk,
2 For unto thee, O Angiras, O Son of Strength, move ladles in the sacrifice.
3. Agni, thou pourest life: send down upon us food and vigorous strength;
11 Now, O ye Maruts, hath your praise rejoiced me, the glorious hymn which ye have made me,
6 We, band on band and troop following troop, entreat with fair lauds Agni's splendour and the Maruts'
when kindled). I have paid reverence, O death, to thine eye, reverence to thy breath.
1. THIS deathless Indu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality,
3 Awakened are the songs that praise the Asvins, the kindred prayers and the Celestial Mornings.
16 Praise the Free-givers. At this liberal patron's rite they joy like cattle in the mead.
In the previous verse, Shree Krishna stated that all objects should be offered to Him. Now He says that all actions should also be offered to Him. Whatever social duties one may be engaged in, whatever vegetarian food one may be eating, whatever non-alcoholic beverages one may be drinking, whatever Vedic rites one may perform, whatever vows and austerities one may observe, should all be offered mentally to the Supreme Lord. Very often, people separate devotion from their daily life, and look on it as something that is only to be performed inside the temple room. However, devotion is not to be restricted to the periphery of the temple room; it is to be engaged in at every moment of our life.Sage Narad defines bhakti in this manner:nāradastu tadarpitā khilāchāratā tadvismaraṇe paramavyākulateti (Nārad Bhakti Darśhan, Sūtra 19)“Devotion means offering your every activity to God, and feeling intense separation if ever you lose remembrance of Him.” When works are dedicated and mentally delivered to God, it is called arpaṇam. Such an attitude metamorphoses the mundane activities of material life into divine service of God. Swami Vivekananda expressed this attitude toward work when he declared: “No work is secular. Everything is devotion and service.” Saint Kabir stated this in his couplet:jahañ jahañ chalūñ karūñ parikramā, jo jo karūñ so sevājaba sovūñ karūñ daṇḍavat, jānūñ deva na dūjā“Wherever I walk, I feel I am circumambulating the Lord’s temple; whatever I do, I see it as service to God. When I go to sleep, I meditate on the sentiment that I am offering obeisance to God. In this way, I remain ever united with Him.” Without realizing its significance, many people say the following verse in temples:kāyena vāchā manasendriyair vā buddhyātmanā vānusṛita-svabhāvātkaroti yad yat sakalaṁ parasmai nārāyaṇāyeti samarpayet tat(Bhagavatam 11.2.36)“Whatever one does with body, words, mind, senses, and intellect, in accordance with one’s individual nature, should be offered to the Supreme Lord Narayan.” However, this act of offering is not to be done at the end of the work by merely reciting mantras, such as śhrī kṛiṣhṇāya samarpaṇam astu, etc., as is done in the Vedic rituals. It is to be done while performing the action itself, by maintaining the consciousness that we are working for the pleasure of the Lord. Having stated that all works should be offered to Him, Shree Krishna now lists the benefits of doing so.
To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to usward.
Wake for us understanding full of riches, come with a heart that will fulfil our longing.
this (earth); in that [3] he piles with clay, therefore is it called the fire.
4 Here sprung to life, they both have sung together, with bodies free from stain, with signs that mark
a O Agni, come to enjoy', he says; verily he summons him.
with thy light establish the sky, with thy brilliance make firm the quarters.
Bounteous, ye filled the cow with milk for Sayu: thus, swift and zealous Ones, ye showed your favour.
9. 'What may I bring to thee, curds, stirred drink, or liquor?' (Thus) I the wife asks her husband in the kingdom of
4 When born to life the golden Bull illumines all the realm of light.
Pravahani desired, 'May I be a speaker of speech.' He grasped the five-night rite [2] and sacrificed with
They evermore are near us with their gracious help: successful is the song that strives for victory.
2. He, searching for the horse's head that in the mountains lay concealed,
6 Give to our princes opulence and immortal fame, and strength in herds of kine to us.
9 That which the Hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, through the air to thee,
3 When swift he follows this behest, bird-like he chants the holy prayers.
Thou cIeavest through the rock with heat and fervent glow. Agni, rise up above the men.
2. Agni is Pavamana, Sage, Chief Priest of all the fivefold tribes; To him whose wealth is great we pray.
Pusan, Brhaspati, Bhaga, both Asvins, and enkindled Agni we implore for happiness.
him whom he hates he should conceive as beneath its feet; verily with the thunderbolt he lays him low.
Then Tvastar, when he viewed the four wrought chalices, concealed himself among the Consorts of the
composed of twenty-one parts; (verily they serve) to obtain man. The man's head is impure as bereft of
4. May I be sweeter than honey; sweeter then liquorice. May you long for me – as a honeybee longs for a flower
27 Borne by your golden-footed steeds, O Gods, come hither to receive
milk departs from him; verily he is seized with evil; in that it is of clotted milk, thereby he bestows milk
12 In great enkindled Agni's keeping, and, for bliss, free from all sin before Mitra and Varuna.
Playing, not playing, he gold-hued and toothless, hath cut his food up as the knife a victim.
the glory of the sacrifice', he should make a Yajus formula last; verily he confers on the sacrificer the
The high altar said, 'Through me ye shall obtain all your desires.' The gods desired, 'Let us overcome the
The way is common for the downward streams to flow. Thou who didst these things first art worthy of
3. On to the fleece they urge with stones the dear, the goldencoloured one,
8 Let no one here debar me from enjoying the golden light which Savitar diffuses.
5 To make the lustre wider and more famous, guarding the sacred grass with veneration,
strew, verily lie wins autumn. He offers with the cry of 'Hail!'; verily he wins the winter. Therefore in
For thee, the Strong, O Bull, hath Indu swollen. juice pleasant, sweet to drink, for thine election.
